KEP 4381: add numeric parameters for dynamic resource allocation (#4384)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/4381-dra-numeric-parameters/README.md

  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

> ## Summary

Reviewer: So, this summary totally makes sense to me...but I think to others coming in "cold", it will still be hard to follow. A version of this [diagram](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/3063-dynamic-resource-allocation#components) for example, showing some different components, the actors, etc. I think would go a long way. I can help out with it on Monday if you want.

Author: Yes, help with making the KEP easier to digest would be welcome. I can take PRs against my branch and just merge that in.

Reviewer 2: There's also these slides that walk through the whole flow end-to-end.

Author: > Edit: I see below you give me a lot of what I want.

Yes, what you asked for above is close to what I had in the "Proposal" section. As you expected it already in the "Summary", I moved it up here, with different wording to reflect recent discussions.

The intro to the "Proposal" section is now empty.

motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

### Goals

- Enable cluster autoscaling when pods use resource claims, with correct
  decisions and changing the cluster size by more than one node at a time.

- Support node-local resources. Adding or removing nodes has no effect
  on network-attached resources and therefore CA does not need to (and cannot)
  simulate them.

- Allow DRA driver developers to provide a user experience that is similar to
  the one possible without semantic parameters. Ideally, users should not notice
  at all that a driver is using semantic parameters under the hood.

- Keep the core DRA functionality from [KEP
  #3063](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3063) working as
  defined there for Kubernetes 1.29. Cluster autoscaling is not always needed
  and in-tree numeric model(s) are not expected to cover all use case, so the
  flexibility offered by opaque parameters remains relevant.

### Non-Goals

> - Support semantic class parameters. They remain opaque and can be used to

Reviewer: I am not sure what "semantic class parameters" are. Are you trying to say that it is a non-goal to eliminate the need for a claim parameter CR? It is something I have wondered - are there use cases where the semantic selection and capacity request API would be sufficient (e.g., where no real configuration is needed, just selection and allocation)? I don't have an answer to that, but it would be a shame if the API forced vendors to create a CRD and a controller that basically just did a "copy from CR to standard API".

Author: The core DRA has claim and class parameters: both ResourceClaim and ResourceClass link to CRDs. What I am saying here is that with semantic parameters, the class parameters have to be limited to configuration because this KEP is not trying to do anything with them.

This is a simplification. We could also extend the KEP later to translate class parameters similar to how we do it now for claim parameters.

> It is something I have wondered - are there use cases where the semantic selection and capacity request API would be sufficient (e.g., where no real configuration is needed, just selection and allocation)?

I was wondering the same. This could be done by letting users create ResourceClaimParameter objects themselves and referring to those in their ResourceClaim. We loose validation, though. I don't know useful this would be. Shall I list it under "alternatives" for future reference?

Reviewer 2: > It is something I have wondered - are there use cases where the semantic selection and capacity request API would be sufficient (e.g., where no real configuration is needed, just selection and allocation)? I don't have an answer to that, but it would be a shame if the API forced vendors to create a CRD and a controller that basically just did a "copy from CR to standard API".

We could define a "standard" `ClaimParamaters` object that the scheduler knows how to interpret directly. If that is referenced by a claim, then the scheduler interprets it directly -- otherwise is delegates this to an external controller.

Author: This is exactly what I was proposing. Perhaps you hadn't seen my comment yet?

We already define a standard `ResourceClaimParamaters` type. It's really just a question whether we allow users to reference it directly and whether that would be useful.

Reviewer 2: You’re right, I basically repeat what you said in your last paragraph. I must have missed that somehow — good to know we are in the same page though.

Reviewer: I don't love having an indirection for the standard claim parameters. Seems like if it's standard, it can be combined into the ResourceClaim directly. But then you either need to allow that OR a reference to a vendor specific one, or (better, in my mind) you offer both. What would that look like? The ResourceClaim would allow you to specify the selection expression across attributes (whether they are vendor specific or not), as well as allocations from allocatable resources. This effectively like device plugin today. Any vendor-specific "config" would go into the vendor-specific CR. You could ALSO use your controller to process the vendor-specific CR and add ADDITIONAL contraints and ADDITIONAL allocations. 

The indirection is something we *have* to do because of how our API works. It's not better for the user. So once it is a common K8s API, the indirection is not needed. But we do still need it for vendor specific things. Allowing both allows the API to be simpler for simpler cases, but still work for complex cases.

Author: Unfortunately the alternatives for getting configuration parameters for class and claim down into the kubelet are all worse.

When the DRA kubelet plugin itself talks to the API server. Then we have issues with pods not starting (parameter object deleted), starting not as intended (parameter object modified after allocation), and less security (permission to read all objects, not just those relevant for the node - probably not that relevant here).

Would it be acceptable to have a RawExtension in the `ResourceClaimParameters` object? Then the driver can can store whatever versioned object it wants during the translation from claim parameters.

We would need a translation from "class parameters" as well. Because we don't want normal users to write those, it would have to be a different ResourceClassParameters resource.

Reviewer 3: > Would it be acceptable to have a RawExtension in the ResourceClaimParameters object?

Yes. But then maybe it should be copied by a k8s controller into the Claim. This is similar to how we deal with Priority: The user sets a priorityClass, but the priority value is copied into the podSpec (I think this happens in the apiserver, but don't quote me on that).

Then kube-scheduler and kubelet only have to look at one object, avoiding retries

  define configuration of resources, but must not affect where a claim can be
  allocated.

- Define exactly one semantic model that covers all current and future resources.

>   There cannot be a "one size fits all" solution.

Reviewer: I am not sure we need to state this, but I am OK if you want to leave it here. The proposal (I expect to see below) provides multiple models and allows us to compose them, so I don't think stating this here is really needed.

Author: It sets expectations right from the start - I think that's relevant.

Author: Not worth arguing about... I've removed this.

## Proposal

Each node publishes information about the nearly-opaque resources it currently

> has. Each driver manages one or more resource instance per node. An instance

Reviewer: s/instance per node/instances per node/

> could be a single discreet piece of hardware like a PCI card or a pool of such

Author: > When would I lump 4 GPU cards into 1 "instance" vs. 4 instances? Is an instance an addressable device (like a PCIe BDF)? Or is it a card which has multiple functions?

I think this is getting to the bottom of the problem we are facing right now. It could be both.

When I started, I wanted to define that inside *the* (yes, only one) semantic model that describes an instance. I said "instance" is a bad term because that model could also describe a pool of items. When it is a pool, there may be constraints on how different items may get combined together. All of that would have been encapsulated inside the description of that one semantic model. Because they would have been versioned separately, they could have evolved as needed.

Then John suggested that we turn that "inside out" and make different semantic models composeable, with very simple semantic models. This only works if we move semantic up into the API. For example, suppose a driver manages two discrete cards, and each card has compute units and RAM that can be reserved. This could get described as:

```
kind: NodeResourceCapacity
...
instances:
  - name: CardA
    labels: [...]
    attributes:
    - name: RAM
      counter:
        count: 1Gi
    - name: ComputeUnits
      counter:
        count: 100
  - name: CardB
    labels: [...]
    attributes:
    - name: RAM
      counter:
        count: 20Gi
   -  name: ComputeUnits
      counter:
         count: 500
```

When someone asks for 1Gi RAM, 100 compute units, the semantic would be "find **one** instance that has enough of both" (attributes ANDed together) and an allocation refers to that one instance by name.

When treating GPUs as anonymous items that are part of the pool, then we could have:

```
kind: NodeResourceCapacity
...
instances:
  - name: BigCards
    labels: [...]
    attributes:
    - name: NumberOfCards
      counter:
        count: 1
  - name: SmallCards
    labels: [...]
    - name: NumberOfCards
      counter:
        count: 1 
```

Now when someone asks for "NumberOfCards 2", this could be satisfied by taking cards from *any* instance. This is a different semantic. There's also no notion of sub-dividing an individual card anymore.

Perhaps we can add a field in the claim parameters that says "take from one instance" vs. "from many". At that point we have dropped "semantic models" as a concept and focus entirely on evolving the `resource.k8s.io` API to make it more and more flexible. This worries me.

In the examples above, I already moved `labels` up from being something that is implemented and checked by a "selector" semantic model into the main API. Whether this is a `map[string]string` or something more complex to make CEL expression fully type-safe would need to be discussed as part of the main API.

If we want to do the same for "counter", then we also lift that up:
```
instances:
  - name: CardA
    labels: [...]
    counters:
    - name: RAM
      count: 1Gi
    - name: ComputeUnits
      count: 100
```

In the Go API, that means removing all "one-of-many" structs like `InstanceAttributes`. If we add new fields, they'll be silently ignored when the scheduler doesn't know about them because there won't be a way for it to detect that it got nothing where it should have had something. This probably goes to far.

> could be a single discreet piece of hardware like a PCI card or a pool of such

Reviewer 3: I would be nice if the Claim could say: I want multiple units of a device, but they all should have the same label X (where this label represents the topology).

> cards. Each instance has certain attributes. These can be qualitative (labels

Author: I buy the argument that the selector should be a CEL expression. I went ahead and defined how this can be expressed so that all validation is strict, of both the input for the expression and the expression itself.

I don't buy that this deserves to be separate from other semantic fields right from the start. If this turns out to be useful *and* defined correctly, then we can still promote it up into separate fields later. For now I have kept "metadata" (the semantic model which describes meta data and the query mechanism) as just another attribute.

or fields for comparison) and quantitative (capacity that gets reduced when
allocated for a claim). These attributes are described by the "attributes type"
of the semantic models. Each instance can combine attributes from different
semantic models. This way, each model can focus on one aspect, like counting

> items or selection via labels.

Reviewer 2: I don't quite understand how a `capacity` can be thought to live directly alongside the rest of an instance's attributes. I would think there are a set of attributes that **_define_** what the instance represents, and then a separate `capacity` (in some sort of wrapping struct) to define how many of those instances are available for allocation.

Something like the following (I know the types for the attributes would need to be generalized, but you get the idea):
```
Instance {
  Driver: "gpu.nvidia.com",
  Name: "gpu",
  Attributes: {
	MigCapable            bool
	Memory                Quantity
	ProductName           string
	Brand                 string
	Architecture          string
	CUDAComputeCapability string
	DriverVersion         SemVer
	CUDARuntimeVersion    SemVer
  }
}

InstanceCapacity{
  Driver: "gpu.nvidia.com",
  Name: "gpu",
  Capacity: 8,
}
```

Reviewer 4: I agree - I have not yet sent all my comments, but we do need to think about what we are modeling, and maybe not FULLY denormalize it?

Workloads make claims to request resources with claim parameters that use CRDs
provided together with a DRA driver. As soon as such a custom CR is created, a
CRD controller of the DRA driver must convert it into a in-tree claim parameter
object that uses the "parameter types" defined by the semantic models.

The scheduler receives both the node resource information and the claim
parameters. It uses the in-tree claim parameters to identify and allocate
suitable resources. It captures all information that the DRA driver kubelet
plugin will need in the "allocation types" of the semantic models and stores
that in the claim status. Then it schedules the pod.

The DRA driver kubelet plugin receives that information when the pod is about to
start. It checks that the hardware is still available and healthy, then
configures it for the pod as specified in the allocation types.

### Publishing node resources

> A semantic model defines an attributes type. This is a Go type that gets

Reviewer: So, IIUC, in your terminology: "attributes" are the common semantic information published by the driver to the `NodeResources` object, where as "parameters" are the selection and allocation request objects derived from the resource claims. If that's correct, it may be helpful to just state that explicitly.

Author: Isn't that what I had as definition in the summary? Okay, might be worth repeating here. I'll check.

embedded inside the resource.k8s.io API, not a separate API kind. The kubelet
queries the registered DRA driver kubelet plugins for resource information
through a new gRPC call. A streaming gRPC API allows drivers to update the
capacity information.

For example, a simple counter could be described in a `counter` Go package as:
```
type Attributes struct {
    // Some meta information just for logging and debugging. Not used for counting.

> 	metav1.ObjectMeta

Reviewer: I am not clear why we need objectmeta for every attribute?

I do think we need a name and type, and then the individual possible fields that could be populated, each of which is different for the different semantic models.

Author: Agreed. Name is useful, I would also allow a UID, just in case.

I don't think we need a type. That is redundant given that exactly one field in the union will be set (enforced by API validation!).

> 	Count int64

Reviewer 2: Maybe it's a problem with the terminology (sorry, yes, again), but I fail to see how a `Count` of something qualifies as an attribute of it (unless this is somehow only used for selection in some way, and *not* for resource accounting).

Reviewer 2: To be clear -- at least in my mind -- the sole purpose of attributes should be so that one can do selection against a given instance type later on. Something else needs to exist outside of this to declare how many instances that have these attributes are available on a given node.

Reviewer 4: Agree - I tried to avoid "selection" because of the baggage of k8s selector semantics, but I think we can streamline it as you suggest.

"qualitative" "constraints" based on descriptive "attributes" get "resolved" or "filtered" or "evaluated" against potential instances.

"quantitative" "requests" for "capacity" can "consume" the published "capacity".

all support the same semantic models and the same versions of them. It might be
possible to support version skew (= keeping kubelet at an older version than
the control plane and the DRA drivers) in the future, but currently this is out
of scope.

### Using semantic parameters as claim parameters

The semantic model also defines a type for claim parameters. For the example
above, that could be:
```
type Parameters struct {
	Required int64
}
```

The `Parameters.Required` value gets compared against `Attributes.Count`.

Suppose a vendor has a CRD which allows requesting a certain number of `frobnicators`:

```
kind: ClaimParameters
apiVersion: dra.frobincatorInc.example.com/v1alpha1
metadata:
  name: my-claim-parameters
  uid: abcd
  resourceVersion: 123
spec:
  requiredFrobincators: 100
```

The vendor CRD controller needs to sync this CRs into one in-tree object:
```
kind: ResourceClaimParameters
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha2
metadata:
  name: frobnicator-claim-parameters
  namespace: default
generatedFrom:
  kind: ClaimParameters
  apiGroup: dra.frobincatorInc.example.com
  name: my-claim-parameters

>   resourceVersion: 123

Reviewer: I think you want `generation` here, not `resourceVersion`, so that updates to metadata and status subresource do not bump the number.

Author: Is the semantic of `generation` well-defined enough for this? What if (for whatever reason) the CRD labels and annotations do influence the generated ResourceClaimParameter?

Demanding that the `resourceVersion` matches feels safer to me, but I don't feel strongly about this.

Author: Are all types required to have a `generation`? Can we assume that all CRDs have it?

  uid: abcd
parameters:
  - counter:

>       required: 100

Author: In this example it's assumed that the driver only manages "frobnicators".

A slightly better example and probably what the "counter" model should support is counting things by name:

```
parameters:
  - counter:
      name: frobincators
      required: 100
```

But I digress :stuck_out_tongue_winking_eye:  This is a discussion that we need to have over in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4385.

Reviewer 4: I can't keep the discussion straight across 3 KEPs - at this point the splitting that may once have had meaning is just confusing me.  I don't know what to do with #4385 right now

Reviewer 4: discriminators are not universally used, but they do help with disambiguation

Reviewer: Regarding 3 KEPs - agreed. I think we should just have two KEPs - one for main DRA, one for the general design of semantic models and the ones we want to deliver together. If we decide to only move *some* of the semantic models to beta and leave some in alpha, we would split those off at that time into their own KEP and featuregate (we don't have to move everything that was in alpha to beta at once, things can change between alpha and beta).

For discriminators...I sort of prefer not having them in this case...seems redundant. But I will leave it to the discretion of the api reviewer :)

Author: > I can't keep the discussion straight across 3 KEPs - at this point the splitting that may once have had meaning is just confusing me. I don't know what to do with https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4385 right now

How about this: we define the counter and selector model in this KEP and leave out mode switching? Otherwise this KEP is going to be blocked by all the discussion that I expect once we try to seriously define that more complex model.

A set of counters is simple enough that examples make sense just when looking at them.

> [union type needs a discriminator](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#automatic-resource-allocation-and-deallocation).

I don't understand how this link relates to union types. Other "one-of-many" APIs don't have any additional type information either, for example https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/api/core/v1#VolumeSource in https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/api/core/v1#Volume.

Lifting up the name might make sense.

Reviewer 4: Maybe "mode switching" means something to me that is different than what you mean?

How can we think about moving forward with a model unless we don't have an idea of how we will accomodate MIG?

```

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

> For this proposal to work, kube-scheduler must have permission to read, list

Reviewer: This is not true anymore, right? The DRA controller now will publish a `ClaimParameters` object; scheduler only needs to be able to read that.

Author: It's still true. I added one section about the why below: the kubelet plugin needs the configuration parameters. Those are only in the opaque vendor CRD. A snapshot of that must be taken during allocation and passed through. This applies to claim and class parameter objects.

This solves two problems (outlined already in the core DRA):
- An allocated claim remains usable even if the user then (intentionally or accidentally) removes the claim parameter object. This is particularly important when a pod stops running an kubelet needs to clean up.
- kubelet and kubelet plugins don't need permission to read the vendor CRDs (more secure this way).

Reviewer: So, talking with @alculquicondor we want to see if we can avoid scheduler reading all this stuff.

If the DRA controller publishes the vendor-neutral `ClaimParameters` object, can we stuff the CR in there as a RawExtension? So, the version used to create the `ClaimParameters` is right there along side it. No need to guess about whether it's been modified. When the scheduler makes the allocation, it can copy the `ClaimParameters` into allocation result. Wouldn't that solve it without immutability, and without reading arbitrary resources in the scheduler?

Reviewer 3: Vendor neutral ClaimParameters sounds ok to me.
Another alternative is this https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#discussion_r1480352958

Author: > If the DRA controller publishes the vendor-neutral ClaimParameters object, can we stuff the CR in there as a RawExtension?

Yes. I came to the same conclusion after missing this comment.

We need to do the same for resource class parameters, but that's the same concept.

Reviewer: Awesome. That cleans things up a lot, I think.

Author: Note that we loose the ability to check the generated parameters for "up-to-date-ness" because the scheduler is never reading the original object and thus doesn't know the UID and Generation of it. But that's okay: if users are updating claim parameters while allocation is going on, there's always a race somewhere. This cannot be prevented by the system.

Author: RawExtension for vendor configuration parameter in ResourceClaimParameters was added. Same for resource class parameters.

and watch the custom claim parameter resources. This is necessary because it is
not known in advance which CRDs will be used by DRA drivers. When deploying a
driver, suitable role bindings for
[`system:kube-scheduler`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/#core-component-roles)
have to be added which grant read, watch and list permissions for the vendor
CRD.

The scheduler does not need to interpret the custom data in those CRDs. It
still needs to read them for two purposes:

> - Ensure that the in-tree claim parameters match the vendor claim parameters

Reviewer: So, if we capture the `generation` in the `generatedFrom`, something that can read the CR will be able to verify that it has not changed since the common ClaimParameters were created.

For the snapshot piece below, how is that captured? I see the resource handle in the main DRA KEP, but that is for the driver to write opaque data, not for this.

I think you are trying to capture "as-was" data - that is, the claim parameter object "as it was at the time of allocation". Because maybe someone changes it between allocation and driver actuation? That is an interesting problem. Users are annoying :)

This is a general question of whether the API is actually declarative or not. A true declarative API would adjust to user changes to the spec. I don't know if that's really what we want. I think in other areas of K8s, when using the `Class/Claim` pattern, this is also somewhat broken. At least, for Gateway API I am pretty sure classes are not declarative in the sense that the user can change them and have the change ripple through to all instances based on that class. Instead, the class is intended to be immutable.

Hmm. Hmm. I am trying to think about how we can avoid the scheduler needing read access to all these CRs. In fact read/write, because may it has to create duplicates or something. That's ugly. Stuff them away in RawExtensions inside the allocation result? I don't like that either.

I am tempted to say that the allocation result should just record the `generatedFrom` including the `generation`. If the generation has changed between allocation and actuation, the resource allocation fails (think of it as an out-of-band change - like if someone ssh'd into the box and mucked with the card configuration). If we did that, the scheduler would only need to be able to read the common claim parameter object written by the driver controller, not any CRs.

Reviewer: It seems like a good simplification because users shouldn't be doing that in general.

Reviewer: Maybe a webhook that reject mutation of the CR if the claim has been used? That has its own issues (permissions and otherwise).

Author: See also https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#discussion_r1477019579

> I think you are trying to capture "as-was" data - that is, the claim parameter object "as it was at the time of allocation". Because maybe someone changes it between allocation and driver actuation? That is an interesting problem. Users are annoying :)

The core KEP talks a bit about "resizing" in this context. It's not unthinkable that users do mutate the claim parameters and then expect that to have an effect on the running pod. The core KEP explicitly states that class and claim parameters only matter at the time of allocation. All changes after that are irrelevant and ignored.

If a DRA driver wants to support resizing, they can by watching out for changes after allocation and then comparing against the state captured during allocation. It's not covered here yet, but might become a future extension.

> Stuff them away in RawExtensions inside the allocation result? I don't like that either.

That's my current thinking.

> Maybe a webhook that reject mutation of the CR if the claim has been used? That has its own issues (permissions and otherwise).

And race conditions. Even if mutation is prevented, there's always delete+recreate to get the same effect.

  reference by the claim and are not out-dated.
- Include a snapshot of claim and class parameters in the allocation result,
  to ensure that configuration parameters are available when the DRA driver
  needs them.

The types that the scheduler needs to watch may change at runtime as classes
get added or removed. To avoid repeated GET operations for those CRDs, dynamic
informers will have to be used that get started and stopped as needed.

## Design Details

### ResourceClass extension

A new, optional field in ResourceClass enables semantic parameters for claims
using this class:

```
type ResourceClass struct {
	...

	// If (and only if) allocation of claims using this class is handled
	// via numeric parameters, then ParameterTypes describes those
	// parameters. A driver might support multiple different CRDs for
	// its claims.

> 	ParameterTypes []SemanticParameterType

Reviewer: I don't understand why we need this. Now that we don't do it through CEL or templates, I think this information would be embedded in the code of the DRA driver controller that translates the CR into the common parameter model.

Author: As discussed in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#discussion_r1477019579 and https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#discussion_r1476910024 we still need to know about vendor CRDs.

}

// SemanticParameterType describes one resource that may be used for
// claim parameters of a class which uses semantic parameters.
type SemanticParameterType struct {
	// APIGroup is the group for the resource being referenced. It is
	// empty for the core API. This matches the group in the APIVersion
	// that is used when creating the resources.
	// +optional
	APIGroup string
	// Kind is the type of resource being referenced. This is the same
	// value as in the parameter object's metadata.
	Kind string

	// Shareable is copied into the AllocationResult when a claim
	// gets allocated.
	Shareable bool
}
```

### NodeResources

For each node, one or more NodeResources objects gets created:

```
// NodeResources provides information about available
// resources on individual nodes.

> type NodeResources struct {

Reviewer: Probably shouldn't be plural, based on API conventions, even though it contains multiple resources. I almost wonder if it should be called NodeResourceSlice, since it captures a subset of resources, though sharded by driver, it is a slice like EndpointSlice.

Author: There are (a few) other types which have the same singular and plural form. It's not common, but allowed.

I'm okay with using `NodeResourceSlice` instead. It nicely emphasizes that there are more of those per node.

Author: ResourceClaimParameters now is another example where IMHO the plural form makes sense for a single object because it contains multiple parameters.

I don't care strongly though.

	metav1.TypeMeta
	// Standard object metadata
	// +optional
	metav1.ObjectMeta

	// NodeName identifies the node where the capacity is available.
	// A field selector can be used to list only NodeResources
	// objects with a certain node name.
	NodeName string

	// DriverName identifies the DRA driver providing the capacity information.
	// A field selector can be used to list only NodeResources
	// objects with a certain driver name.
	DriverName string

	// Instances describes discrete resources managed by the driver on
	// the node. It is possible to create more than one NodeResources
	// object for the same node and driver if this array becomes to large
	// for a single object.
	Instances []NodeResourceInstance
}

// NodeResourceInstance describes one discrete resource instance.
type NodeResourceInstance struct {
	// ID is chosen by the driver to distinguish between different resource
	// instances. It only needs to be unique for the driver and node.  In
	// other words, the tuple of NodeName, DriverName, InstanceID needs to
	// be unique in the cluster.
	ID string

> 

Reviewer 2: I feel like a `Capacity` field at this level would cover what I was trying to get at earlier.

    // Attributes describe the instance.

> 	Attributes []InstanceAttributes

Reviewer: Should we separate "selection" attributes versus "allocation" attributes? I am not sure. The interesting thing could be that selection attributes can be operated on by selection parameters and an expression across those parameters. I am not sure that means we need to separate them, though.

What I am circling around here is that I think we may be able to define a more common set of selection criteria: "vendor", "model", "capability", etc. They also may be able to be de-normalized across an entire node or group of instances. For example, if you have 8 identical cards in a node, then you can list all the selection criteria just once: vendor, driver version (it's at the node level after all), model, etc.

Author: I don't think we need to define in advance which attributes do what. That follows from the type used inside the `InstanceAttributes`.

Reviewer 2: Read this after leaving my previous comment. I think John is getting at exactly what I was proposing.

}

// InstanceAttributes must have one and only one field set.
type InstanceAttributes struct {

> 	<one pointer per semantic model>

Reviewer: also needs a discriminator and a name

> 	<one pointer per semantic model>

Reviewer 2: I don't understand why semantic models come into play at this level. An instance should have a set of attributes that can be selected on, period. I would actually expect the whole notion of semantic models to be **_completely decoupled_** from the `NodeResources` object. 

Where the `NodeResources` object declares the full set of possible resources that *could* be available (at all), and something else stitches together the way in which the resources declared here might be allocated out (i.e. according to different "semantic models")..

Author: Modeling driver resources as "finite set of instances" with one counter for the set and some non-quantitative attributes for each instance *is* already a semantic model. It needs to be expressed in the `NodeResources` type. There might be other, more complex resources which need different resource model and thus representation. 

Therefore `NodeResources` depends on semantic models.

}

> ```

Reviewer: The "parameters" side of this seems to be missing. You have instance attributes defined. But there should be a common ClaimParameter model too, which basically has an array of union types. You sort of define it above but not here in the details section, which is a little confusion.

I think the detailed design section should follow basically the same flow you put up in the summary, but add all the basic API objects your talking about, and sort of explain how each is created and managed.

Now, I think we can take it farther. In particular I think for the selection, we may want to consider a CEL expression. So, if the resource attributes for selection are basically a bunch of key-value pairs, and we make them essentially universal (with driver-specific ones allowed), then you can bump the selection expression up to the ResourceClass (and maybe tighter selection in the ResourceClaim). So, you might have something like (not sure the right apiVersions here):

```yaml
apiVersion: core.k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: ResourceClass
metadata:
  name: acme1000-gpu-v3-plus
driverName: gpu.example.com
parametersRef:
  apiGroup: gpu.example.com
  kind: GPUInit
  name: acme1000-gpu-v3-plus
selection: "model == 'acme1000' && driverMajorVersion >= 3"
---
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: ResourceClaim
metadata:
  name: myclaim
spec:
  resourceClassName: "acme-gpu"
  parametersRef:
    apiGroup: gpu.example.com
    kind: GPURequirements
    name: device-consumer-gpu-parameters
  selection: "driverMajorVersion == 3 && driverMinorVersion == 2 && driverPatchVersion >= 7 && attributes['gpu.example.com/foo'] == 'bar'"
```

Basically, we make the common things people need to do, like selection, common. We leave the CR to cover the really really specific stuff. In this case, the vendor can create different classes that select on top of the set of attributes, and the claim author can further refine that if they want to. The selection attributes can include well-known ones (model, driverVersion) as well as driver-specific ones (`gpu.example.com/foo`).

This prevents every vendor from having to create their boolean expressions, etc. to allow selection.

The user *already* has to write a resource claim as well as a vendor-specific claim parameter. So, I don't think adding this to the resource claim is a worse UX. In fact, I think it's better, because otherwise every vendor will have their own version of this.

Alternatively, this "selection" behavior could be stuffed into a semantic model itself. But I think that would be more confusing.

Author: > Basically, we make the common things people need to do, like selection, common.

I don't see "model", "driverMinorVersion", etc. as something that is common. Even if we were to pre-define them as fields or names in the resource.k8s.io API, their semantic would be mostly left to vendors. Let's start by defining selection via a semantic model. If we then find that it deserves to be a first-class citizen, we can do that as a future step.

I agree with making selection a CEL expression. We can make it type-safe by defining not just `labels map[string]string` where the value has to be interpreted at runtime, but instead `labels` (really just opqaque strings), `quantities` (values are `resource.Quantity`) and `versions` (values are semver).

I am not sure whether we need semver. It is more expressive than a (major, minor, patch) tuple. If such a tuple is enough, then it can be stored in `quantities` with three different names. Hmm, we probably want it. The boolean expression for `(major1, minor1, patch1) > (major2, minor2, patch2)` is complicated.

Author: > The "parameters" side of this seems to be missing.

Right. Looks like I left out the Go type for `ResourceClaimParameters` and only mentioned it in the intro. Will add.

Reviewer 2: I can see how having a `selection` (or `selector`) field available at this level could be useful for drivers that don't want to define their own selection API. For those that do, however, it might be confusing to have this field available here (which one takes precedence if both are set, for example).

I would opt for not including this in the initial iteration, and instead create a builtin, generic `ClaimParameters` type against the `resource.k8s.io` API group that includes this. When referenced in a claim, the scheduler will know how to read / interpret these parameters directly without having to delegate their translation to a DRA driver controller.

Reviewer 4: > useful for drivers that don't want to define their own selection API

At risk of repeating: IMO, selection (constraint resolution) is a generic process.  Devices offer information and users write CEL against that information.  We don't need to dictate what is IN that information, just the "query language" used to evaluate it.

Author: Where the values to match the selector against may depend on the semantic model that describes the resources. Not all models will have that information "at the root".

Author: The current "partitionable" model has attributes at all levels.

If a driver needs to reduce resource capacity, then there is a risk that a claim gets
allocated using that capacity while the kubelet is updating the
NodeResources object. The implementations of semantic models must handle
scenarios where more resources are allocated than available. The DRA driver
kubelet plugin must double-check that the allocated resources are still
available when NodePrepareResource is called. If not, the pod cannot
start until the resource comes back.

> ### Builtin controllers

Reviewer: I think I need context here as to what this section is describing

Author: This probably is only going to make sense to the few folks who have looked at the the "dynamic resource" scheduler plugin source code. It describes the Go API for implementing semantic models and how that plugin uses them.

Can we keep that level of detail out of the KEP and discuss the details during the code review? I think we can.

Author: Simplified...

`k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation/builtincontroller` defines Go interfaces
that need to be implemented by a semantic model to handle tracking of resource
usage and allocation/deallocation. The package also has a global registry of
builtin controllers.

##### Initialization

All registered builtin controllers get activated when kube-scheduler or CA
start. At this point they start building an internal model of which resources
are available (based on those entries in NodeResources objects that they
are responsible for) and how those resources are already used (based on the
status of allocated claims).

##### Allocation

When the dynamic resource plugin in kube-scheduler encounters a claim which,

> according to the class, uses semantic parameters, it expands the CEL template

Reviewer: ok, yeah, this looks like it hasn't yet been updated for the latest discussions (no CEL, use a driver controller for the translation).

From the scheduler (plugin) perspective, it just needs to find the `ClaimParameter` resources that correspond to the pod it is trying to schedule, then use the selection criteria to reduce the set of possible nodes, then use that smaller set to do the fit calculation against the capacity availability. I think we need a description here as to how this works (or references back to the main DRA KEP).

Reviewer: I think the lines below have yet to be updated, so I am going to stop for tonight.

Author: Updated now.

> and decodes into the capacity type, using `Kind` and `APIVersion` to determine

Reviewer 2: is "capacity type" the right word here after the newest revision?

EDIT: I see Johsn comments above about this not being updated yet ...

- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

Dynamic Resource Allocation uses parameters for resources that are completely
opaque to core Kubernetes. They get interpreted by the DRA driver's controller
(for allocating claims) and the DRA drivers' kubelet plugin (for configuring
the resource on a node). During scheduling of a pod, kube-scheduler and the DRA
driver controller(s) that handle claims used by the pod communicate through the
apiserver by updating the PodSchedulingContext object, ultimately leading to

> allocation of all pending claims and the pod being scheduled onto a node.

Reviewer: So, you make a good point with this comment:

> So basically a configurable mapping of fields in a vendor CRD to the in-tree numeric model type? That adds more flexibility, but also complexity. I don't see how it addresses the "fragility between resources" - instead of one configurable field path, we would have many. Perhaps being explicit about all paths would help. 🤷

I think my initial comment didn't quite hit the right issue. The point is that the interaction between the scheduler and the DRA driver's controller here creates too tight of a coupling that it is hard for things like cluster autoscaler to replicate. What I am trying to get to is a looser coupling. One way we can do that is to separate evaluation of the workload (claims) from reservation/allocation. For instance, we could define a driver-neutral model that represents a node's capacity of different individual resources (and ideally their relationships to one another within various topologies). It would be the responsibility of the kubelet and the  on-node driver agents produce a resource in the api server with this data. This is effectively already what you're doing, just translated into a K8s neutral model rather than captured in driver-specific structures.

Similarly, we would still need (in many cases), a per-driver controller to interpret the driver-specific claims. However instead of the scheduler asking during the scheduling process, we would not even start trying to schedule until each of those driver controllers has contributed to an overall resource request object. In other words, just as we have a driver neutral k8s resource to represent the capacity in the node, we would have a driver-neutral capacity request object in the control plane. The scheduler and other components would deal exclusively in these driver-neutral models.

We may need a way to publish a "schema" describing the specific ways in which allocations can be done out of the model. And we will need a separate resource to represent reservations, so that we can atomically allocate resources across drivers.

Author: > One way we can do that is to separate evaluation of the workload (claims) from reservation/allocation.

The numeric parameter approach already does that: evaluation of how to allocate is done in-memory, without any interaction with the apiserver. The once there is a result, the scheduler updates objects to finalize it's decision and get a pod running. This could be extended to schedule multiple pods - it's just not how the scheduler works today.

> This is effectively already what you're doing, just translated into a K8s neutral model rather than captured in driver-specific structures.

The `NodeResourceCapacity` already contains data that is in a format defined by Kubernetes (the capacity type defined for a model). Only the claim parameter object is using a driver-defined type, but that also has a mapping to a Kubernetes type.

> we would have a driver-neutral capacity request object in the control plane

This sounds like you prefer to replace ResourceClaim with something else that is a bit higher level. I'm not sure about that: suppose that one workload needs a GPU and requests it together with some other resources via a single object. One of the use cases is to schedule another "monitoring" pod, potentially with a different life cycle than the workload, which gets access to the same GPU. But that pod then only needs that GPU, not the rest. ResourceClaim is the right level of abstraction for that.

> And we will need a separate resource to represent reservations, so that we can atomically allocate resources across drivers.

That part becomes harder with multiple ResourceClaims per workload. The *decision* can be atomic and doesn't need to worry about concurrent allocation of capacity because the scheduler is the sole owner of the node capacity, but persisting that decision isn't atomic. But the same is true for persisting the pod binding, which also needs to update multiple different objects.

This approach poses a problem for [Cluster
Autoscaler](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler) (CA) because it cannot
simulate the effect of allocating or deallocating claims. "Numeric parameters"
is an extension of DRA that addresses this by making claim parameters less
opaque. "Numeric models" define how resource capacity per node can be published
and the claim parameters that allocate some of that capacity for a claim.

This KEP describes the core changes needed for this. Specific numeric models

> get defined in separate KEPs. Developers will be able to add their own numeric

Author: True. But people are using custom schedulers today, for whatever reason, in environments where they can be used. It would be good to support such scenarios.

> get defined in separate KEPs. Developers will be able to add their own numeric

Author: Custom schedulers are no longer supported, therefore I am closing this conversation.

models by recompiling kube-scheduler and/or CA without having to modify any of
the upstream code.

> When opting into using numeric parameters for their DRA driver, driver

Author: That is what we have to warn DRA driver developers about. They know what their customers need and then can decide how to serve those needs.

this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

### Goals

- Enable cluster autoscaling when pods use resource claims, with correct
  decisions and changing the cluster size by more than one node at a time.

- Support node-local resources. Adding or removing nodes has no effect
  on network-attached resources and therefore CA does not need to (and cannot)
  simulate them.

- Allow DRA driver developers to provide a user experience that is similar to
  the one possible without numeric parameters. Ideally, users should not notice
  at all that a driver is using numeric parameters under the hood.

- Support adding and versioning multiple different numeric models without
  having to modify the implementation of DRA or the numeric parameters
  extension.

- Keep the core DRA functionality from [KEP
  #3063](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3063) working as

>   defined there for Kubernetes 1.29. Cluster autoscaling is not always needed

Author: There are use cases for "Kubernetes on the edge". In such clusters, the set of edge nodes is determined by the installed hardware and there is no need to support Cluster Autoscaler for those nodes.

>   defined there for Kubernetes 1.29. Cluster autoscaling is not always needed

Reviewer: I don't think we need this goal here; if we changed how DRA works today, we would have to update that KEP. So, I think this just creates a little confusion. Ultimately, if the functionality in this KEP can cover the uses cases currently handled by PodSchedulingContext, or can cover *enough* of them to make that complexity not worth cost, we would make those updates that that KEP.

>   defined there for Kubernetes 1.29. Cluster autoscaling is not always needed

Author: I've removed this goal.

  and in-tree numeric model(s) are not expected to cover all use case, so the

>   flexibility offered by opaque parameters remains relevant.

Reviewer: Great question. You are right, I don't see this as a goal. From a "KEP goal" perspective, I think we should focus on ensuring the core use cases can be met while continuing to support cluster autoscaling. I think that an opaque "escape hatch" is a fallback / workaround and we should see how far we can go without it. In the proposal I have ("strongly typed" as Patrick describes it), we can go there if we need to - by adding a `custom` field that refers out to driver-specific data. But I would prefer to start by seeing how far we can get without that.

In other words, let's see if we can cover the 80% of use cases with a well-defined model with semantics that any client can rely on. For the other 20%, we can look at different workarounds. One is "add a custom model", but another, simpler one may be "just let them take the whole node". I am not convinced that there are use cases that need both the highly dynamic scheduling and the driver-specific logic.

My plan for the next day or two is to look through the use cases in detail and exercise the model to see if/how it may cover them.

### Non-Goals

- Support numeric class parameters. They remain opaque and can be used to
  define configuration of resources, but must not affect where a claim can be
  allocated.

- Define exactly one numeric model that covers all current and future resources.
  There cannot be a "one size fits all" solution.

## Proposal

### Publishing node capacity

A numeric model defines a capacity type. The type has its own API group, kind
and potentially different versions. It must support encoding and decoding JSON
with an apimachinery scheme. The kubelet queries the registered DRA driver
kubelet plugins for capacity information through a new gRPC call. Drivers
respond by returning the JSON encoding of this capacity type. A streaming gRPC
API allows drivers to update the capacity information.

> For example, a simple counter could be described as:

Author: I'll add here that this example is what is being defined in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4385.

```

> const GroupName = "counter.dra.config.k8s.io"

Reviewer 4: I 'm not clear why this needs two names?  Maybe my own pre-assumptions are coloring it?  Is this like a Counter vs a Gauge in prometheus?

It seems like "counter.dra.config.k8s.io" expresses "this is a counter".  Why is it ""counter.dra.config.k8s.io/Capacity" and not ""counter.dra.config.k8s.io/Counter" or ""dra.config.k8s.io/Counter" ?

Author: This is literally just the API group. That API group then has different types for:
- publishing capacity ("capacity type")
- representing claim parameters ("parameter type")
- storing the result of an allocation ("allocation type")

We can name all of these types the same way in all numeric models (`Capacity`, `Parameters`, `Allocation`). In Go, the package name then becomes `counter.Capacity`. As a string, it would be `counter.dra.config.k8s.io/Capacity`. Either way, we don't need to name the type itself `Counter`.

const KindName = "Capacity"
const Version = "v1beta1"

type Capacity struct {
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
	metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`

	Count int64 `json:"count"`

> }

Reviewer 5: If we need a slice of 1g.20gb then I understand that the `Count` should be 1 but who sets the slice 1g.20gb and how is the node selected?

> }

Author: Yes, that's the difference. The "capacity type" is used when publishing capacity of a node, the "parameter type" when asking for resources via the vendor CRD.

> }

Author: @tzneal:

> Have you considered expanding metav1.LabelSelector with these features vs. making another label selector?

I have. I'm worried about breaking the existing APIs which use `metav1.LabelSelector`. It's not impossible, but it would have to be done with extreme care. It's probably better to fork, iterate on the extended implementation while it's still alpha, and then later consider merging. Or perhaps not - it would then still be very risky.

@klueska: 

Globbing could be added, it's just another operator.

Could comparison with boolean be handled with comparison against "true"/"false" (strings)? That already works. The vendor CRD might be able to constrain the values for the comparison to just those. If it cannot be expressed by the validation in the CRD, then and admission hook could add this additional validation.

But this brings me to the main issue: arbitrary expressions with brackets. Those are not part of my proposal. If we allow them, how do we represent them? A single string that then gets parsed or nested structures (similar to metav1.LabelSelector)?

https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/#set-based-requirement describes a syntax for requirements and https://github.com/kubernetes/apimachinery/blob/02a41040d88da08de6765573ae2b1a51f424e1ca/pkg/labels/selector.go#L212-L267 is similar, but have not found an example of an existing API which accepts such strings. Does anyone know of one?

`LabelSelector` and `FieldSelector` in https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/apis/meta/v1#ListOptions might come close, but I think the syntax is different ("fieldA=value1,fieldB=value2").

> }

Reviewer 2: I'm not in favor of arbitrary expressions with brackets. 

This is how I represent them in the current DRA driver for GPUs (where we get to bring along our own API):
https://github.com/NVIDIA/k8s-dra-driver/blob/main/api/utils/selector/selector.go#L31

With a concrete struct that (ultimately) instantiates this type:
https://github.com/NVIDIA/k8s-dra-driver/blob/main/api/nvidia.com/resource/gpu/v1alpha1/gpuselector.go#L32

And an example usage:
https://github.com/NVIDIA/k8s-dra-driver/blob/main/demo/specs/selectors/parameters.yaml#L8

> }

Author: > I'm not in favor of arbitrary expressions with brackets.

Agreed. What you have seems usable also for numeric parameters, we just have to generalize.

> }

Reviewer: @klueska take a look at this comment if you haven't already: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#issuecomment-1912886646

We shouldn't confuse the example here for the claim parameters with the request objects. I  have an example in there that shows that the "parameter" object, the "request" object and the "capacity" object are different objects, so maybe provides a clearer example. It sounds like based on Patrick's example that includes a selector, you are asking for a selector criteria in the capacity model. That seems a little odd to me, and I would think selector possibly would bubble up to ResourceClaim directly since it's already a well-understood, user-facing concept. Though, I could see a case where either the user or the resource class / driver author would want to specify selectors.

I am curious about the globbing and boolean questions. Booleans are covered in my proposal (as "capabilities"), but right now in there it's just a series of independent capacity constraints AND'd together. One thing I am thinking about for the MIG case is a nested model that provides alternative InstanceCapacity objects that may chosen in a mutually exclusive way. This allows the scheduler and/or cluster autoscaler to iterate through options.

Similarly, you could define a type that provides logical operations (as opposed to just ANDing them all), or we could extend InstanceCapacity with an "expression" field that uses a CEL expression to provide a logical operation on top of the array of ResourceCapacity objects.

Either of those options is *super powerful*. BUT they expand the scheduler / autoscaler search space in likely NP-complete ways. So, we should be careful before going there, and have some mitigation plans - for example, examining the requests and capacity to find the "quick" exclusionary criteria and prune the paths early.

On globbing, I would like to poke at that a little more. It would be easy to support as "just another operator" as described above. But, who is writing those globs? Is it the ResourceClass author or the user consuming the resource? If it's the ResourceClass author, have you considered a controller that applies labels based upon the globs, and then we can rely on ordinary label selection? If we do that, we get the indexing provided by label selection, whereas with globbing we require evaluation against all nodes.

> }

Reviewer 2: I will read through the comment you linked in the morning. I did a review of the KEP text earlier today, but I didn't get to the non-inline comments on the PR yet (which includes your linked comment).

That said, here's a response to your comment here:

> It sounds like based on Patrick's example that includes a selector, you are asking for a selector criteria in the capacity model.

Hmm, I would need to look back at where I left my exact comment, but (as far as my uses cases are concerned) you would *not* need a selector on the `Capacity` object, only the `Parameters` object.

> On globbing, I would like to poke at that a little more. It would be easy to support as "just another operator" as described above. But, who is writing those globs? Is it the ResourceClass author or the user consuming the resource? 

The user consuming the resource in the `ClaimParameters` object he references in his `ResourceClaim`. The capacity object needs to encode the properties of the resources they represent, and the user needs a way to "select" the right resource based on some boolean expression that matches on these properties.

> }

Reviewer 2: See [GPU selection via complex constraints](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1bDO11rEq_Yhpgpk5RN0VwnMLV1_2wNWvtOyM_QoIV_Y/edit#heading=h.io7fw1qvnb8y ) for an example of how I do this in the existing DRA driver for GPUs. We don't have to do things exactly like this, but I want to be able to do something similar.

> }

Reviewer: My point about the label selector was that "ClaimParameters" is an example of a vendor-specific CR and so I don't see the point in discussing the details of its contents. It's just a placeholder and not a part of the DRA API. Or am I misundertanding this?

> }

Reviewer 2: If we want selection to work with this numeric models proposal, then there needs to be a generic framework for selection that isn't baked into the vendor specific API.

It's not enough to just say "I have 5 GPUs", you need to be able to say "I have 5 GPUs with this set of properties", and the scheduler needs to be able to match the selector passed in a resource claim to these properties in some way.

Maybe I'm too close to the original DRA proposal and this one doesn't include the notion of a `ClaimParameters` object, but something in the `ResourceClaim` needs to let me pass a selector to match on the properties of the resource type I am requesting.

> }

Reviewer: Makes sense. I think it's covered in the proposal, but take a look tomorrow and see what you think. The proposal still has ResourceClaim with a reference to a vendor-specific CR. We translate that into a vendor neutral request object using CEL (which can operate on arbitrary CRs by treating them as `Unstructured`). Various selection criteria could be included there (they are not discussed in there now, beyond a boolean true/false).

> }

Author: I agree that we need a more comprehensive expression language than `metav1.LabelSelector`. `metav1.LabelSelector` only gives us `<term1> && <term2> && ...` where each term is one label check.

In @johnbelamaric's proposal, each hardware instance is described by more than one numeric model and the vendor CRD with the claim parameter then gets mapped to one parameter type per model. Each model is then checked independently and all must match an instance.

At first glance this looks appealing because one can "compose" the description of the hardware from different building blocks. But now consider mode switching. Each mode may have labels that need to match the selector provided by the user. The "selector model" is unaware of "modes", so it cannot be used. The "mode switch model" has to re-implement it. Alternatively, more details of the mode switch model need to be hoisted up into the `resource.k8s.io` API. This is a slippery slope where the common API becomes more and more complex.

Therefore I prefer to stick with "one model per driver" and instead implement label selection as a shared library that can be used by the different models. Both the "counter model" and the "mode switch model" would support it, with the difference that the "counter model" publishes a a flat set of labels as part of its capacity while the "mode switch model" has labels for the entire instance and each mode.

> }

Reviewer 2: Regarding globbing -- it's been a long-standing feature request for users to be able to request GPUs based on the model name returned by `nvidia-smi`.

Examples of such model names include the following:
```
Tesla V100-SXM2-16GB
NVIDIA T4 32GB
NVIDIA A100-SXM4-40GB
NVIDIA H100 PCIe
```

As some background, it's common for people to prototype their workloads in `docker` on a specific GPU model before moving them to Kubernetes. When doing so, they are keenly aware of the GPU model they are running on, and want to ensure that they continue to run on this same GPU model once deployed under Kubernetes.

Now keep in mind, this is already possible today using the extended resource exposed by the current device plugin API (i.e. `nvidia.com/gpu`) in conjunction with a node label that advertises the GPU model (assuming all GPUs on a node are homogeneous, of course).

It would look something like this:
```
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: gpu-example
spec:
  containers:
    - name: gpu-example
      image: nvidia/cuda
      resources:
        limits:
          nvidia.com/gpu: 2
  nodeSelector:
    nvidia.com/gpu.model: NVIDIA A100-SXM4-40GB
```

Independent of the fact that selection occurs at the node level rather than the device level in this example (which DRA proposes to solve), matching on an exact model name is problematic for two reasons:
1. As evidenced above, the format of the model name is inconsistent -- meaning that users have to remember the differences between them when putting their selectors together.
2. There is not just a single model name for, say, an A100 card on a given machine. The model name encodes other information, such as if its on a mother board that connects devices [within a PCIe hierarchy or via SXM](https://gpus.llm-utils.org/nvlink-sxm-and-pcie/#:~:text=SXM%20is%20a%20Nvidia%20specific,SXM%20cards%20are%20NVLink%20compatible), or how much memory the card has on it (e.g. 40GB, 80GB, or 96GB).

Some examples of (2) include:
```
NVIDIA A100-PCIE-40GB
NVIDIA A100-SXM4-40GB
NVIDIA A100-PCIE-64GB
NVIDIA A100-SXM-64GB
NVIDIA A100-PCIE-80GB
NVIDIA A100-SXM4-80GB
``` 

It would make the UX much nicer for one to be able to select on something like "`*A100*` in cases where they only care about getting access to an A100 (and don't care about the interconnect or the amount of memory -- they should be using a separate selector for memory anyway).

For cases where the *do* care about being more specific, they still can be by either matching on the full model name or a different subset of it using an alternate glob expression.

Given the (revised) proposal we have of using a DRA controller to translate any vendor specific selection parameters into selectors that the scheduler will understand (apologies I don't know the right terms here yet to be more specific), I imagine the scheduler could take `modifier` expressions that tell it to ignore case, for example, and the DRA controller could decide if it wants to apply these modifiers or not when performing the translation.

> }

Reviewer 4: > Regarding globbing -- it's been a long-standing feature request for users to be able to request GPUs based on a subset of the model name

People want to glob, substring, prefix, or regex match kube selectors, too.  Just say no.

> The model name encodes other information

You have a stringly-typed structure.  Ideally you would decompose this into actual atoms of information, and let the user select on those. 

> It would make the UX much nicer for one to be able to select on something like "*A100*" in cases where they only care about getting access to an A100

So name the concept that "A100" represents.  "family"?  "generation"?  A glommed together name is great for dumping in a logfile, but we have data structures for a reason.

>  they should be using a separate selector for memory anyway

exactly

Anyway, I probably won't die on the hill of not allowing globbing, but I will push back strongly.

```

The kubelet then combines all of this information in a new NodeResourceCapacity
object which contains the JSON representation of a capacity type in a
`runtime.RawExtension`. The kubelet itself never has to interpret that data.

### Using numeric parameters as claim parameters

The numeric model also defines a type for claim parameters. In the simple example
above this is the same `Capacity` type, but more complex models will have
a more complex capacity type and a simpler parameter type.

When defining the CRD for the claim parameters, the driver developer replicates
those fields from the numeric model which are relevant for the driver and adds
custom validation. For a complex model, this can be a true subset of the fields
in the parameter type. The validation can set bounds that are specific to the
driver. One can think of this as "duck typing": the CRD doesn't need to include
the numeric type, a subset of it just needs to behave like one.

To enable extracting the numeric parameters, they must be located at a specific
JSON path (e.g. "spec"). "Kind" and "apiVersion" must be included at that

> path. Users don't need to set those, the CRD can add them via defaults. This is

Author: An alternative for this "JSON path + 1:1 mapping of fields" is to store a Go template in the class. Expanding that template must result in a YAML or JSON representation of the numeric parameter type. The data for the [Execute](https://pkg.go.dev/text/template#Template.Execute) call will be the `unstructured.Unstructured` representation of the parameter object.

This template here should match the example:
```
kind: Capacity
apiVersion: counter.dra.config.k8s.io/v1alpha1
count: {{.spec.count}}
```

This removes the need to embed a custom `TypeMeta` inside the CRD.

The downside is the loss of the strong correlation between CRD version and numeric parameter type version: this template will be used for *all* CRD versions and always produces `counter.dra.config.k8s.io/v1alpha1`.

This can be fixed, it just gets more complicated:
```
{{if eq .apiVersion "dra.e2e.example.com/v1alpha1"}}
kind: Capacity
apiVersion: counter.dra.config.k8s.io/v1alpha1
count: {{.spec.count}}
{{end}}
```

If the `ClaimParameter` type ever gets versioned, then additional if blocks need to be added for the new versions.

I'm not sure whether I got the Go template syntax right. We'll probably have to add some test tools for this or a Go playground example.

Author: I'm not a fan of Go templates either, so if we have something better then I am open to that.

> No loops but we could add functions that for example take an array and find the min/max etc.

We need to be careful about what we allow: the existence of such functions and their parameters become part of the Kubernetes API. Do we perhaps a stable set of functions that we can refer to instead of defining (and implementing) our own set?

Go templates have the same problem, but at least those come with some "batteries included".

Author: So does CEL in Kubernetes, and there is already some strong versioning support:
https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/cel/

I've [prototyped templating](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/123033), but must be missing something because I get an error when parsing expressions. I asked for help and will keep looking...

best explained with an example:

```
const GroupName = "dra.e2e.example.com"
const KindName = "ClaimParameter"
const Version = "v1alpha1"

type ClaimParameter struct {
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
	metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`

	Spec ClaimParameterSpec `json:"spec"`
}

type ClaimParameterSpec struct {
	TypeMeta `json:",inline"` // Not metav1.TypeMeta! See below.

	// +kubebuilder:default=1
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Minimum=1
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Maximum=16
	Count int64 `json:"count,omitempty"`

> 	Env map[string]string `json:"env,omitempty"`

Author: It's just such an example. `Env` is not part of any numeric model. It is used by the test/e2e/dra/test-driver.

}

type TypeMeta struct {
	// +kubebuilder:default=Capacity
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=Capacity
	Kind string `json:"kind,omitempty"`

	// +kubebuilder:default=counter.dra.config.k8s.io/v1alpha1
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=counter.dra.config.k8s.io/v1alpha1
	APIVersion string `json:"apiVersion,omitempty"`
}
```

In this example, the driver supports the `Count` numeric parameter and adds
environment variables as configuration parameters. There is a 1:1 relationship
between the CRD type and the numeric type that it is using. Users define
parameters like they would without numeric parameters:

```
kind: ClaimParameter
apiVersion: dra.e2e.example.com
spec:
  count: 10
  env:
    HELLO_WORLD: "Thanks for the fish."
```

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

> For this proposal to work, kube-scheduler must have permission to read, list and

Author: I hadn't thought about that possibility. This should indeed work.

But from a practical perspective it raises a challenge: does the scheduler have a well-defined service account name? Otherwise vendor's won't know what to put into their role binding. We probably have to warn vendors that they need to be flexible here in their driver deployment.

> For this proposal to work, kube-scheduler must have permission to read, list and

Reviewer: I poked around a bit. There is a default bootstrap cluster role binding for the `system:kube-scheduler` user:

```
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRoleBinding
metadata:
  annotations:
    rbac.authorization.kubernetes.io/autoupdate: "true"
  creationTimestamp: "2023-12-19T01:18:51Z"
  labels:
    kubernetes.io/bootstrapping: rbac-defaults
  name: system:kube-scheduler
  resourceVersion: "141"
  uid: 0c0ec4fa-27ea-4aae-99dc-8069e8c80334
roleRef:
  apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
  kind: ClusterRole
  name: system:kube-scheduler
- apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
  kind: User
  name: system:kube-scheduler
```

That is a well-known user for kube-scheduler, so the recommendation for driver authors would be to create a cluster role that provides access to their CRs, and add a cluster role binding for that user. If some distribution of K8s does things differently, they would need to modify the driver installation.

> For this proposal to work, kube-scheduler must have permission to read, list and

Reviewer: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/#core-component-roles

watch arbitrary resources. This is necessary because it is not known in advance
which CRDs will be used by DRA drivers.

This may change at runtime as classes get added or removed. To avoid repeated
GET operations for those CRDs, dynamic informers will have to be used that get
started and stopped as needed.

### Risks and Mitigations

Granting kube-scheduler permission to read arbitrary types could be used by an
attacker to extract information. However, for that an attacker first would have
to gain control of the scheduler, get it to execute API calls, and then

> retrieve the result. This seems like a low risk.

Reviewer 2: This is moot given the discussion above about DRA drivers bringing along their own role / role-binding, correct?

Author: Correct.

Using a single NodeResourceCapacity object per node is simple and convenient
also for admins, but might run into size limitations. This should not be a
problem in practice because the number of drivers per node is expected to be
low and the capacity information from each should be small. Limits for the
JSON fragment can be introduced to prevent excessive sizes.

## Design Details

### Decoding claim parameters

Extracting the numeric parameters can be done without knowing the CRD:

- Look up the resource based on group and kind with a REST mapper.

- Retrieve the object with a `dynamic.Client` as an `unstructured.Unstructured`
  instance (basically a nested map).

- Retrieve the sub-map via the JSON path.

- Re-encode that part as JSON with the normal `encode/json` package.  In the
  example above, this will include `kind` and `apiVersion:
  counter.dra.config.k8s.io` because those are the defaults and only allowed
  values.

- Decode into the numeric parameter with the apimachinery JSON decoder,

>   ignoring unknown fields like `env` in this example.

Reviewer 2: This goes back to my previous question...

Just to make sure I understand, this implies that a `ClaimParameters` object *MUST* be a superset of the number `Parameters` type defined for this resource. Where anything *not* included in the `Parameters` type is assumed to be interpreted by the kubelet plugin when actually preparing an allocated claim.

Author: Your understanding is correct.

There are some alternatives for the process for extracting numeric parameters from the vendor CRD:
- field path (this text here)
- Go templates (https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384/files#r1455827364)
- CEL (https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384/files#r1467088455)

John and I prefer CEL, but I need to try it out first. The concept remains the same (vendor CRD -> numeric model's parameter type).

### ResourceClass extension

A new, optional field in ResourceClass enables numeric parameters for claims
using this class:

```
type ResourceClass struct {
    ...

    // If (and only if) allocation of claims using this class is handled
    // via numeric parameters, then NumericParameters must list all claim
    // parameter types that are allowed for claims.
    NumericParameters []NumericParameterType
}

type NumericParameterType struct {
	// APIGroup is the group for the resource being referenced. It is
	// empty for the core API. This matches the group in the APIVersion
	// that is used when creating the resources.
	// +optional
	APIGroup string

	// Kind is the type of resource being referenced. This is the same
	// value as in the parameter object's metadata.
	Kind string

	// FieldPath is a dot separarated JSON path that defines where in the
	// parameter object the numeric parameters are embedded.

> 	FieldPath string

Reviewer: This assumes a single scalar parameter to be extracted for this numerical parameter type, which seems to conflict with the statement above that the capacity request parameter may be struct (even though the example is just a single counter). Unless I misunderstand. This is where I was thinking a numerical-model specific structure that holds CEL expressions could live.

Author: > This assumes a single scalar parameter to be extracted for this numerical parameter type,

No, the path points to an `interface{}` in the `unstructured.Unstructured`, so the content under that path could also be an object. It's just that anything below that path then must have the structure defined by the numeric parameter type, which is less flexible than templating.

> This is where I was thinking a numerical-model specific structure that holds CEL expressions could live.

Yes, instead of FieldPath we could have a Go template or CEL expression here.

	// Shareable is copied into the AllocationResult when a claim
	// gets allocated.

> 	Shareable bool

Reviewer 2: If I remember correctly, this is currently at the top-level (i.e. as part of a `ResourceClass` object). It's probably worth mentioning that it is moved inside of here.

Author: The ResourceClass has no `Shareable`. Such a field is only in [`AllocationResult`](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/922fbbf5b70d461118dc03e4eb2eb2ddc8762481/staging/src/k8s.io/api/resource/v1alpha2/types.go#L169). The scheduler needs to know what to put there, which is why the information needs be provided in `NumericParameterType`.

Reviewer: I am not sure why this would be in the parameter type. Are getting at that a given parameter allocation can be exclusive or non-exclusive? I think that probably belongs in the actual semantic model class (or maybe it is satisfiable with a single-counter attribute, I am not sure and need to think more on it...the "mount for monitoring" case comes to mind).

Reviewer 2: "mount for monitoring" is different than simply being able to mark a given claim as sharable or not.

In the common case, when a resource is bound to a claim it cannot also be bound to another claim at the same time. Meaning, that the resource is removed from the pool of available resources that can be assigned to a claim once it has been allocated. The `sharable` field in this case indicates whether the claim that resource is bound to can be referenced by multiple pods or not. 

The case of "mount for monitoring" is different, because you want to create a claim that can inject a resource into a container *without* removing it from the pool of available resources.

Since all allocation decisions are made by individual DRA drivers in the original DRA design, supporting claims that provide these "monitoring" or "management" capabilities, is left up to the DRA driver itself. In the DRA driver for GPUs, for example, we accomplish this as follows:
1. Provide a special `ClaimParameters` object called `GpuManagementClaimParameters` (which have the same selector capabilities as a normal `GpuClaimParameters` object). 
2. Pods that reference claims that (in turn) reference a `GpuManagementClaimParameters` object will be granted access to the GPUs selected by it, but those GPUs will not be removed from the pool of GPUs available for other claims.
3. We enforce that only pods running in a namespace with a `management.gpu.nvidia.com=true` annotation applied are allowed to reference claims with `GpuManagementClaimParameters`. Pods not running in such a namespace will not be granted access to such a claim and will fail to start.

Given that the new plan of record is to outsource the translation of vendor specific `ClaimParamaters` to a DRA controller, it seems feasible that the controller for our DRA driver for GPUs could continue to do this namespace check (and other vendors could do something else, if desired).

However, *something* must exist in the type that a controller translates its parameters into, that allows it to specify that the resource selected should *not* be accounted against the total number of available resources.

Author: > I am not sure why this would be in the parameter type. Are getting at that a given parameter allocation can be exclusive or non-exclusive?

A claim can be exclusive or non-exclusive. Exclusive (= sharable false) means that only a single pod may reserve it at a time. This is enforced.

Putting this into the in-tree claim parameters also work. It doesn't need to be in the class.

Author: Moved into ResourceClaimParameters where it's controlled by the vendor or user (if we allow users to create them).

}
```

### NodeResourceCapacity

For each node, a NodeResourceCapacity objects gets created:

```
// NodeResourceCapacity gets published by kubelet. Its name
// matches the name of the node and the node is the owner.
//
// Capacity may get added, but should not get removed because
// it would make scheduling decisions based on the old capacity

> // invalid.

Reviewer 2: What if a device goes unhealthy? How does one find out that a certain device is no longer available for scheduling if we cannot "decrease" the capacity here.

In the traditional device plugin API, this is accomplished by keeping a persistent watch open, where the plugin updates the kubelet with a full list of devices anytime that list needs to change (e.g. a device goes unhealthy and is no longer part of the list, or a new device is hot-plugged and gets added to the list).

Author: The mechanism would be the same here, and in the case of an "unhealthy" device the capacity would get decreased. I'll remove this comment here and instead elaborate on this in a section of the KEP.

type NodeResourceCapacity struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta
	// Standard object metadata
	// +optional
	metav1.ObjectMeta

	// Resources contains information about the capacity
	// reported by each DRA driver.
	//
	// +optional

> 	Resources []DriverResources

Author: This object combines the resource information of all drivers on the node. This was based on:
- convenience for users (`kubectl get noderesourcecapacity/<node name>`)
- ease of implementation (no need to track objects because of the deterministic name), simple implementation in the node authorizer

But overall size is a concern here. I think I now prefer to split this up:
```
type NodeResourceCapacity struct {
...
NodeName string
DriverName string
ResourceInstance runtime.RawExtension
}
```

We can still make this convenient for the user by allowing to filter by nodename and drivername field.

The kubelet needs to use a similar filter in its watch to only receive objects that it owns. I need to check how the node authorizer can restrict create and read access.

cc @bart0sh @byako

Author: One positive side effect of the revised API is that E2E testing is easier to parallelize: publishing NodeResourceCapacity for one driver is independent from that for other drivers.

Reviewer: So, I think we should *probably* define this structure rather than leaving it as a RawExtension. Since we are defining numerical models anyway, why wouldn't we define the capacity structure?

In fact, perhaps I am misunderstanding something about the proposal. As I understand it, the NumericParameterTypes defined in the resource class tell us how to extract the relevant parameters from the claim parameters (putting those into a K8s, driver-neutral list of numerical requests). But if the capacity structure is opaque, how to do we do the fit evaluation? What am I missing? Perhaps it's that the individual numerical requests have some sort of name or path that associates them to a field in the opaque capacity structure? If that's the case, we may be able to get away with that at first, but I suspect the name mapping may not be enough; we may need another CEL transformation to represent the allocation process (if it's a more complex allocation).

Another option would be to combine the steps, where instead of the resource class including a list of "extraction" CEL expressions, it instead includes a set of "allocation" expressions. So, the inputs to those expressions would be the node capacity and the claim parameters. The output would be the new node capacity after that allocation. We would also probably need a validation expression to identify if that is a valid allocation (for example, a counter can't go negative).

I think that could work. The only issue is I am not sure it provides *visibility* for the scheduler and/or CA into the reasons allocation may be failing, so that they can make smarter choices. It sort of forces a random walk of the search space when trying to schedule or find a valid new node type to create. I'd like to be able to provide a model that can be interpreted. But perhaps that's a later step.

Author: > So, I think we should probably define this structure rather than leaving it as a RawExtension. Since we are defining numerical models anyway, why wouldn't we define the capacity structure?

Several reasons:
- There's more then one capacity type (one per numeric model). Instead of a single field we would need a struct which must have one (and only one) of several different alternatives.
- The capacity type needs to be registered in the apiserver. kubelet needs to know about them, too. With the current proposal, adding a new numeric model can be done without changing the apiserver and kubelet. This would be important for someone building their own scheduler with some additional, non-core numeric model.

Author: Coming back to the question around object size vs. number of objects - let's go for a compromise and use this:

```
type NodeResourceCapacity struct {
...
NodeName string
DriverName string
Instances []struct {
   InstanceID string
   Capacity runtime.RawExtension
}
```

Most likely, all instances of a single driver will fit into one object, so we end up with a handful of objects per node (one for each driver). The API would be defined from the start such that it's allowed to have multiple objects per driver. If kubelet detects that a single objects gets too large, it can create multiple.

But we don't need to implement that in 1.30 because this overflow detection and recovery would be complicated. Always creating a single object should be good enough for alpha.

@bart0sh: I'll revise the prototype accordingly on Monday. Sorry for the back and forth...

Author: @johnbelamaric: let's continue the discussion around `RawExtension` here. I listed the main advantages of that approach in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384/files#r1467587340.

From a practical perspective, using `RawExtension` enables delayed updates of kubelet: kubelet can remain at v1.30 while control plane and DRA drivers already get updated to a future version with a different numeric model. I believe it's not unusual to skip kubelet updates because it's more work, more disruptive, and harder to roll back than control plan updates.

If we do something like you proposed in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#issuecomment-1912886646 where `NodeResourceCapacity` depends on the capacity types of the numeric models, where would you define those types?

If in the `resource.k8s.io` API, then kubelet needs to link against `k/k/pkg/apis` to do the conversion and validation. If in the `k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation` API (my current proposal), then the `resource.k8s.io` API depends on that. Both seem doable to me, but neither is ideal.

Author: The drawback of `RawExtension` is delayed validation: kubelet and apiserver accept raw data, only the final recipient , the scheduler, parses and checks it.

For a user API that is a pretty big no-no, but here we are talking about validating data provided by a DRA driver. I think it's okay to put a bit more trust into DRA drivers (it is a privileged component on the node) and their developers (there are less of them than end-users of Kubernetes; if they make a mistake. it is limited to the usage of their DRA driver).

Author: Side note: instead of `RawExtension`, let's use [`Unknown`](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/runtime#Unknown). That makes `kind` and `apiVersion` explicit at the core API level, which is better than implicitly requiring it inside the raw data.

Author: Using `Unknown` didn't work out, encoding to/from JSON ignores the `kind` and `apiVersion`. But lifting those fields up still makes sense and can be dong by adding `Type metav1.TypeMeta`.

Author: @johnbelamaric: let's use this thread for "strongly typed" vs. "pass from driver to scheduler" (= `RawExtension`).

You wrote:
> Putting the numerical models behind raw extension doesn't make them NOT part of the K8s API - it just makes them an unmanaged extension to the API that lacks the consistent versioning and standard deprecation controls and policies.

No, that's not correct. They become APIs under k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation/apis, with an `OWNERS` file that ensures that api reviews are done for them. This is the same approach that is taken for other Kubernetes APIs like [the kubelet config](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/kubelet/config/OWNERS). The normal Kubernetes rules and processes for managing APIs also apply to the numeric models.

Let me repeat the benefits of the current design:
- supports version skew (kubelet older than control plane)
- allows building custom schedulers with custom numeric types without having to modify Kubernetes first (not a priority, but might become important for some users)

cc @liggitt

Reviewer 2: I didn't read this thread in detail yet (I will get to it soon), but I wanted to throw in my support for keeping `RawExtension`s here. As pointed out by @pohly and @johnbelamaric, it's DRA driver implementors (not end-users) that will be defining the types that map to these RawExtensions. So while we do lose the ability to do proper validation at the time one of these CRs is created, the added flexibility is justified by the fact that only a handful of experts will be populating these fields in practice.

Reviewer 2: Independent of that, I also had a general question about how this type relates back to the `Capacity` type discussed in the original example (i.e. the one with just a single `Count` field).

Assuming this was the only numeric parameter supported by a driver, would an instance of this `Capacity` type be what gets set assigned to `Instances[0].Capacity` below?: 
```
type NodeResourceCapacity struct {
...
NodeName string
DriverName string
Instances []struct {
   InstanceID string
   Capacity runtime.RawExtension
}
```

Author: @klueska: correct.

Reviewer 6: replying specifically to all the threads about RawExtension and whether the core API types should be defined with schemas or opaque and unvalidated - threads like:
* https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#discussion_r1467101423
* https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#discussion_r1468500718
* https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#discussion_r1469580780
* https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#issuecomment-1913108043
* https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#issuecomment-1913255154

---

From https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#discussion_r1467587340:

> There's more then one capacity type (one per numeric model). Instead of a single field we would need a struct which must have one (and only one) of several different alternatives.

That sounds exactly like the [union type](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#Unions) pattern we use everywhere in the API where we have multiple mutually-exclusive options with their own schemas, validation, etc.:

> API objects often are [union](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#Unions) object containing the following:
>
> 1. One or more fields identifying the Type specific to API object (aka the discriminator).
> 2. A set of N fields, only one of which should be set at any given time - effectively a union.
>
> Controllers operating on the API type often allocate resources based on the Type and/or some additional data provided by user.

That allows for strongly-typed and validated data while allowing for future expansion.

---

From https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#discussion_r1467587340:

> With the current proposal, adding a new numeric model can be done without changing the apiserver and kubelet. This would be important for someone building their own scheduler with some additional, non-core numeric model.

Wanting to do that for the kubelet seems good... thinking about how to make kubelet a lossless pipe to be able to accommodate future additions on older kubelets is a good thing to think about, but I don't think that requires using RawExtension in the type definition itself. If the bulk of this API is just the accumulated capacity information, the kubelet could use something like the dynamic client to pass accumulated capacity info opaquely to the API server with [strict field validation](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.29/staging/src/k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/apis/meta/v1/types.go#L569-L586).

For the API server, though, if the point of these is to custom DRA things into well-understand things the scheduler can interpret, the API server's _job_ is to make sure persisted stuff is valid, so it's confusing to want to change or define new well-understood numeric models _without_ changing the API server and scheduler.

---

From https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#discussion_r1468501870:
> The drawback of RawExtension is delayed validation: kubelet and apiserver accept raw data, only the final recipient, the scheduler, parses and checks it.

There's no precedent for accepting and persisting arbitrary structured data without validation into core REST APIs which is required to have a consistent structure and interpretation by core Kubernetes components. We work _really_ hard to move as much validation as early as possible in the pipeline since propagating errors back to the user gets harder the more async API write layers removed we are from the thing that persisted something problematic. We also want to do the validation once at write time centrally in the API server, not repeatedly at read time distributed in multiple reading components.

---

From https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#issuecomment-1912886646:

> NodeResourceCapacity is no longer a RawExtension but instead a collection of well-defined types with commonly undertood semantics. Individual entries have names and each has an associated numerical model type.

That roughly matches my expectation. I'd probably add a type discriminator field as well. We could start with the types we understand today, and if we need new models in the future (as I expect we will), the union type would grow new options.

---

From https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#issuecomment-1913108043:

> So in other words, individual numeric models become part of the Kubernetes API. What is the advantage of that?

API documentation, API server validation, schema validation, clear stability guarantees, etc

> Your initial reaction to seeing RawExtension probably was "this is opaque, that's bad". But it is not opaque where it matters (scheduler, autoscaler) because those components who care about the capacity can decode it using Kubernetes-defined API types.

I don't understand this point, couldn't the same be said about most APIs that are only read by a small number of components? It moves failure modes to the point of reading and makes all of those components responsible for validation, which doesn't seem good.

> The downsides are the higher bar that we have to clear with designing these numeric models.

I think the bar is the same regardless of where we define the type.

> If we get it wrong, the resource.k8s.io API is stuck with supporting failed experiments because e.g. ResourceCapacity.Block will forever be associated with this "block" model.

We've dropped alpha fields before, so if an experiment fails before alpha → beta you can tombstone a field name and not be stuck with it (though you can't reuse the same field name for a different schema later).

---

My summary:

* Fields that are written to the API server in built-in APIs and are read and interpreted by core components like scheduler should be understood and validated by the API server, and should not use RawExtension.
* Keeping type safety and validation concerns with a single actor once at write time is greatly preferred over multiple actors at read time.
* Allowing for future expansion / future models is a good concern. A union type allows for that.
* Allowing for old kubelets to opaquely create these objects is a good concern. I think there are ways to address that (like using the dynamic client) without giving up type information and validation at the API and API server layer.

Author: > That sounds exactly like the [union type](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#Unions) pattern we use everywhere in the API

Yes, it is. Let's spell it out. This would be the type definition in `resource.k8s.io/v1alpha2`:
```
import (
    // Some numeric models...
    counterv1alpha1 "k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation/apis/counter/v1alpha1"
    modeswitchv1alpha1 "k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation/apis/modeswitch/v1alpha1"
)

type NodeResourceInstance struct {
	ID string
	
        Model NodeResourceModels
}

// Must have exactly one field set.
type NodeResourceModels {
    Counter *counterv1alpha1.Capacity
    ModeSwitch *modeswitchv1alpha1.Capacity
}
```

Note that this tries to keep the semantic models separate from each other and the common `resource.k8s.io` API. That works for the public types. It does not work for the internal types unless we also export them in `k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation`. So perhaps this should be under `k8s.io/api` (external) and `k/k/pkg/apis` after all (but see below)?

We need to do the same for the allocation result. Currently that is stored in `Data`:
```
type ResourceHandle struct {
	Data string
}
```

We need to extend that with pointers:
```
type ResourceHandle struct {
	Data ResourceHandleData
}

// Warning, API break between v1alpha2 and v1alpha3 (assuming we switch to that).
type ResourceHandleData {
        Driver *string
	Counter *counterv1alpha1.AllocationResult
	ModeSwitch *modeswitchv1alpha1.AllocationResult
}
```

> > With the current proposal, adding a new numeric model can be done without changing the apiserver and kubelet. [...]
>
> Wanting to do that for the kubelet seems good... thinking about how to make kubelet a lossless pipe to be able to accommodate future additions on older kubelets is a good thing to think about, but I don't think that requires using RawExtension in the type definition itself. If the bulk of this API is just the accumulated capacity information, the kubelet could use something like the dynamic client to pass accumulated capacity info opaquely to the API server with [strict field validation](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.29/staging/src/k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/apis/meta/v1/types.go#L569-L586).

So kubelet stores a `NodeResourceCapacity` as `unstructured.Unstructured`, receives some data from the DRA driver for `counter`, parses it into `map[string]any` and stores that in the `unstructured.Unstructured` map, then finally submits to the apiserver. I can see how that'll work.

Well, not quite. kubelet needs to pick a version for the `NodeResourceCapacity` when setting up a watch, with a field filter for the node name. We want to cache existing objects of that resource to detect when the data is stale.
Suppose that's `v1alpha3` (the version known to kubelet). That means all DRA drivers on the node must provide data that matches `counterv1alpha1.AllocationResult` or `modeswitchv1alpha1.AllocationResult`, otherwise kubelet cannot write back.

`NodeResourceCapacity` objects are per-driver. I suppose it would work if the driver told kubelet "store this data in `counter` using NodeResourceCapacity v1beta1". This works as long `v1alpha3` and `v1beta1` are "similar enough" - i.e. the rest of the fields don't change. Could work for `NodeResourceCapacity`. We would need to give up reusing existing objects: if kubelet is seeing a revision that it hasn't written itself, it has to overwrite, because it cannot compare `NodeResourceModels` (potential version mismatch). 

I don't see how to make it work efficiently for `ResourceHandleData`. Here kubelet needs to receive `ResourceClaim` as strongly-typed objects, with `v1alpha2`. To get the full data for the driver, it would need to do one GET with the driver-specific version. Perhaps okay performance-wise?

Suppose we give up "kubelet as lossless pipe". It then needs access to the internal type definitions, otherwise it cannot convert between `v1alpha1` (sent by an old driver) and a newer `v1alpha2` (used by kubelet). I don't think it should link against `k/k/apis`, so let's keep the types in `k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation` with just the schema registration exported, but not the internal types?

> API documentation, API server validation, schema validation, clear stability guarantees, etc

- API documentation: these types are for DRA driver developers. I think they'll be more concerned about good godoc documentation and less about the generated API documentation.
- API server validation: ack. I agree that this is the main weakness of the `RawExtension` proposal.
- schema validation: the types of the semantic model would also be available for registration in a scheme, so this would be covered (if I understand the difference to "API server validation" correctly)
- clear stability guarantees: this is covered by an OWNERS file that makes the semantic model types part of the Kubernetes API (same as kubelet config)

Reviewer 4: This format (GH conversation threads) is really breaking down.  Patrick, you're making jumps that I don't follow.

What I read in Jordans remarks was that it would be better to define a small set of strongly typed and managed parameter semantics, which can be extended in the "usual" kubernetes ways.

I don't know how to track th erest of your response - you have some context I don't. :(

Author: Your take away from Jordan's comment is correct. The other key take away is that allowing kubelet to be older than the control plane and the driver is useful.

This is where strong typing causes a problem. Jordan outlined a potential solution, but it has gaps that I tried to explain in my response, hoping that Jordan might offer some more advice. I have thought about it some more and now see a path forward that combines "strong typing" with "kubelet a lossless pipe".

But let's not discuss that path further now. As a first step we can ignore "kubelet a lossless pipe" and add it later. It won't make a difference for 1.30 (only one version) and an API break in 1.31 would be okay (alpha APIs in 1.30). A solution in 1.30 would be better, but that can be discussed together with the implementation. IMHO it doesn't need to be in the KEP from the start.

}

type DriverResources struct {

> 	// DriverName identifies the DRA which provided the capacity information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	// DriverName identifies the DRA driver providing the capacity information.
```

	DriverName string

	// ResourceInstances describes all discrete resource instances that are
	// managed by the driver. Each entry must be an object of one of the
	// supported numeric resource capacity types with kind, version and uid
	// set. The uid only needs to be unique inside the node.
	//
	// +optional

> 	ResourceInstances []runtime.RawExtension

Reviewer 2: There are so many levels of indirection with `RawExtension` types that I keep getting lost. Can you show a quick diagram of example object names (I don't need to see full struct definitions), and how they all fit together for all of these new objects being defined.

}
```

If a driver needs to remove capacity, then there is a risk that a claim gets
allocated using that capacity while the kubelet is updating the
NodeResourceCapacity object. The implementations of numeric models must handle
scenarios where more resources are allocated than available. The DRA driver
kubelet plugin must double-check that the allocated resources are still

> available when NodePrepareResource is called. If not, the pod cannot cannot

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
available when NodePrepareResource is called. If not, the pod cannot
```

> start until the resource comes back.

Reviewer 2: Or we have the ability to bounce failed pods back to the scheduler under certain conditions: https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C5P3FE08M/p1705584616712299

Reviewer: This can also be used above, if the CR generation has changed by the time the allocation reaches the driver.

Reviewer 2: Note: this is an existing issue with the traditional device plugin API, today (which is exacerbated by the existence of the TopologyManager).

I don't think we should assume support for such a "bounce-back" capability is a prerequisite for this KEP, but it will improve the story around such transient failures significantly.

### Builtin controllers

`k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation/builtincontroller` defines Go interfaces
that need to be implemented by a numeric model to handle tracking of resource
usage and allocation/deallocation. The package also has a global registry of
builtin controllers.

##### Initialization

All registered builtin controllers get activated when kube-scheduler or CA
start. At this point they start building an internal model of which resources
are available (based on those entries in NodeResourceCapacity objects that they
are responsible for) and how those resources are already used (based on the
status of allocated claims).

##### Allocation

When the dynamic resource plugin in kube-scheduler encounters a claim which,
according to the class, uses numeric parameters, it looks up which builtin

> controller handles the claim parameters. That controller then is asked to

Reviewer 2: I must be missing something still.  How does this lookup happen? Meaning what are the criteria for lookup?

Author: I need to be more explicit here. It's still evolving a bit, though, with the actual API changes in the ResourceClass still not finalized (field path -> Go template -> CEL).

Right now, each builtin controller is invoked and then checks whether it understands the claim parameter type after the conversion to the numeric model. The one which does is used. There will be at most one controller per type.

There might be none. This can happen when the numeric type expected by the DRA driver is not enabled or not available in the scheduler. Then this claim cannot be allocated and the scheduler will emit an event with that information.

      running user workloads?
    - Diagnostics: What are the useful log messages and their required logging
      levels that could help debug the issue?
      Not required until feature graduated to beta.
    - Testing: Are there any tests for failure mode? If not, describe why.
-->

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

DRA driver developers have to give up some flexibility with regards to
parameters. They have to learn and understand how the different numeric models
work to pick one which fits their needs.

> ## Alternatives

Author: TODO: document why extending NodeStatus isn't desirable.

have to be added which grant read, watch and list permissions for the vendor
CRD.

This may change at runtime as classes get added or removed. To avoid repeated
GET operations for those CRDs, dynamic informers will have to be used that get
started and stopped as needed.

## Design Details

### ResourceClass extension

A new, optional field in ResourceClass enables numeric parameters for claims
using this class:

```
type ResourceClass struct {
	...

	// If (and only if) allocation of claims using this class is handled
	// via numeric parameters, then NumericParameters must list all claim
	// parameter types that are allowed for claims.
	NumericParameters []NumericParameterType
}

type NumericParameterType struct {
	// APIVersion is the group and version for the resource being referenced
	// as claim parameter.
	// +optional
	APIVersion string

	// Kind is the type of resource being referenced. This is the same
	// value as in the parameter object's metadata.
	Kind string

	// CELTemplate gets expanded with the claim parameter object as input.
	// The version of that object will be as specified by APIVersion.

> 	CELTemplate string

Author: @thockin [was concerned](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#issuecomment-1918109611) that admins will not get this right:
> I don't buy this - what will really happen 99% of the time is that the vendor will provides N suggested classes with the mappings. Admins who change that will likely break their clusters.

I agree that this is a risk. Admins have to set up the class exactly as instructed by their vendor. What are the alternatives?

- Drop templating, rely on DRA CRD controller to convert and publish as status: [complicated, has its own challenges](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#issuecomment-1918663267)
- Reference a config map that comes as part of the driver installation: simple?
- Reference an entirely new type  that comes as part of the driver installation: more complex, not sure whether a separate type just to store a string is justified.

Admins can still get it wrong, but at least what they can get wrong is smaller when storing the template elsewhere.

Author: One advantage of putting the CELTemplate into its own type (whether it is ResourceClass or something new) is that the apiserver can parse and validate the template.

Author: @thockin: another concern that @johnbelamaric brought up: is templating another no-go from an API and architecture perspective? Does it depend on how we do the templating?

There's [a thread](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#discussion_r1471870744) about "expression types" or string templates, but both share the same problem (can fail during evaluation).

Reviewer 4: Reading, and I don't want to over-state before really comprehending, but... templates make things hard to reason-about and are my least-preferred path for building something humans can use.

Author: Agreed. Let's continue in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384/files#r1474085092.

those fields from the numeric model which are relevant for the driver and adds
custom validation. For a complex model, this can be a true subset of the fields
in the parameter type. The validation can set bounds that are specific to the
driver.

```
const GroupName = "dra.e2e.example.com"
const KindName = "ClaimParameters"
const Version = "v1alpha1"

type ClaimParameters struct {
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
	metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`

	Spec ClaimParameterSpec `json:"spec"`
}

type ClaimParameterSpec struct {
	// +kubebuilder:default=1
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Minimum=1
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Maximum=16
	NumberOfFrobnicators int64 `json:"numberOfFrobnicators,omitempty"`

	// Additional configuration parameters, in this case
	// some environment variables for the container in which
	// the Frobnicators are going to be used.
	Env map[string]string `json:"env,omitempty"`
}
```

The following template is used to generate a
`counter.dra.config.k8s.io/Parameters` description from a
`dra.e2e.example.com/ClaimParameters` object:

```
kind: Parameters
apiVersion: counter.dra.config.k8s.io/v1alpha1
Required: {{object.spec.numberOfFrobnicators}}

> ```

Author: @johnbelamaric: does this make sense?

I know that in your example you had instead something like this:
```
kind: Parameters
apiVersion: counter.dra.config.k8s.io/v1alpha1
Required: "object.spec.numberOfFrobnicators"
```

But I don't know how to implement that: this cannot be decoded into a `counter.Parameters` because the `Required` field is an int64. The CEL expression has to be evaluated and replaced *before* decoding.

We could decode into `unstructured.Unstructured`, but then how would the code determine which of the `any` values is a CEL expression string and what are literal strings?

We also can't make it a rule that only "leaf" values can be expressions. Suppose the driver author had wanted to populate the `Selector`. Then the template becomes:
```
kind: Parameters
apiVersion: counter.dra.config.k8s.io/v1alpha1
Required: {{object.spec.numberOfFrobnicators}}
Selector: {{object.spec.frobnicatorLabels}}
```

Here `object.spec.frobnicatorLabels` must be a valid value for the `metav1.LabelSelector` struct.

Reviewer: So, in my [proposal](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#issuecomment-1912886646), there are request object and their are request expression objects. They are separate data types. Think of it as a "strongly typed" version of a template:

```go
// Request objects
type ResourceRequest struct {
	Name string

	// exactly one should be populated
	Capability *bool
	Counter *ResourceCounterRequest
	Quantity *ResourceQuantityRequest
}

type ResourceCounterRequest struct {
	Request int64 `json:"request"`
}

type ResourceQuantityRequest struct {
	Request resource.Quantity `json:"request"`
}

// Request expression objects
type ResourceRequestExpression struct {
	Name string

	// exactly one should be populated
	Capability *bool
	Counter *ResourceCounterRequestExpression
	Quantity *ResourceQuantityRequestExpression
}

type ResourceCounterRequestExpression struct {
	Request string `json:"request"`
}

type ResourceQuantityRequestExpression struct {
	Request string `json:"request"`
}
```

So, no templating is needed because the structure of the types is built in.

An aside: I didn't bother with a CapabilityRequestExpression struct because it's just a boolean. But in fact I can imagine wanting to examine the CR and decide whether a given capability is required or not, so we might want one of those.

See also https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/123033#issuecomment-1917856708

Author: So with your approach, a vendor can inject content from their CRD into pre-defined "slots" of the request. What if those slots are for fields that are more than just simple string or integer values?

In this example, the entire `Selector` comes from the CRD:

```
kind: Parameters
apiVersion: counter.dra.config.k8s.io/v1alpha1
required: {{object.spec.numberOfFrobnicators}}
selector: {{object.spec.frobnicatorLabels}}
```

Now suppose that having a full `metav1.LabelSelector` is too complex for the user-facing API. Instead, the CRD contains individual fields that need to be converted to a `metav1.LabelSelector`. That's a better API because all available labels are documented directly in the CRD.

With a template, that's easy:

```
kind: Parameters
apiVersion: counter.dra.config.k8s.io/v1alpha1
required: {{object.spec.numberOfFrobnicators}}
selector:
  matchLabels:
    driver.example.com/frobnicatorColor: {{object.spec.frobnicatorColor}}
    driver.example.com/frobnicatorSmell: {{object.spec.frobnicatorSmell}}
```

With your approach, the CEL expression would need to construct a `metav1.LabelSelector`. Is that really possible?

I'm still using `metav1.LabelSelector` as example. The actual label selector will probably be even more complex.

Author: One more thought about
>  Think of it as a "strongly typed" version of a template

and

> Each expression must return the appropriate type, based upon the underlying capacity struct.

We cannot validate that because the input object has unknown types for its fields.

The net result is that there is more validation of a request expression object (some of the structure must be right) compared to a template string, but developers can still make mistakes which are only caught during evaluation against a specific CR.

Reviewer: > The net result is that there is more validation of a request expression object (some of the structure must be right) compared to a template string, but developers can still make mistakes which are only caught during evaluation against a specific CR.

Yeah, agreed. We can evaluate that the expression is syntactically correct, and CEL will do impilicity type conversions. But you absolutely could still have runtime failures against specific CRs, if the author of the CEL expression makes a mistake.

Reviewer: > With your approach, the CEL expression would need to construct a metav1.LabelSelector. Is that really possible?

Yes, I have done something similar in CEL to generate a `map[string]string`, it looked something like this:

```go
// MapExpr is used for various fields to calculate map entries. Only one of
// Key and KeyExpr may be specified; similarly only on of Value and ValueExpr
// may be specified.
type MapExpr struct {
	Key       *string `json:"key,omitempty"`
	Value     *string `json:"value,omitempty"`
	KeyExpr   *string `json:"keyExpr,omitempty"`
	ValueExpr *string `json:"valueExpr,omitempty"`
}
```

So, in yaml you could write:

```yaml
mapEntries:
- key: foo
  value: bar
- key: foobar
  labelExpr: "object.foobar"
- keyExpr: " 'foo-' + object.bar "
  labelExpr: "object.foo[object.bar]"
```

The result would be a map with three key/value pairs. This was a user-facing API so having both a literal and expression version of each of key and value was convenient. But it's semantically equivalent to only have expressions.

Patrick - this probably doesn't address your concern you raised in our live discussion about if the source has unknown numbers of entries in an array (ie, array -> array type processing). Will I find that example in the mode switch KEP? In general, there is still a lot of work to figure out how to express everything.

Author: > this probably doesn't address your concern you raised in our live discussion about if the source has unknown numbers of entries in an array (ie, array -> array type processing).

Indeed, that is the problematic case. Even worse, it might be recursive.

> Will I find that example in the mode switch KEP?

We can use the [label selector](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/dff3dfb8b5c1fa39afba13716f6e0cb6de8a1206/keps/sig-node/4383-dra-semantic-model-mode-switching/README.md#label-selector) from that KEP as target type and the example from https://github.com/NVIDIA/k8s-dra-driver/blob/main/demo/specs/selectors/parameters.yaml#L8 as input CR.

We need to transform this:

```
apiVersion: gpu.resource.nvidia.com/v1alpha1
kind: GpuClaimParameters
metadata:
  namespace: kubecon-demo
  name: "inference-gpu"
spec:
  selector:
    andExpression:
    - memory:
        value: "16G"
        operator: LessThanOrEqualTo
    - cudaComputeCapability:
        value: "7.5"
        operator: GreaterThanOrEqualTo
```

into this:

```
apiVersion: modeswitch.dra.config.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: Parameters
selector:
  and:
    - label: memory
      value: "16G"
      op: LEQ
      type: Quantity
    - label: cudaComputeCapability
      value: "7.5"
      type: Semver
```

This is just one example. We cannot assume that the input has exactly this structure. It might also be:
https://github.com/NVIDIA/k8s-dra-driver/blob/b6c7aae2b87d857668f417689462da752090406f/demo/specs/selectors/parameters.yaml#L18-L27

cc @klueska

Reviewer 4: This last comment sets off alarms for me.  

a) Encoding an expression-grammar in YAML is kind of disgusting.
b) Encoding a vendor-specific expression-grammar in YAML is even worse.
c) Transforming one vendor-specific expression grammar into another expression grammar is even worse yet.

This feels a bit like "we made a wrong turn 3 km back".

Author: > a) Encoding an expression-grammar in YAML is kind of disgusting.

I was asking about a type for the expression (e.g. `metav1.LabelSelector`) with the corresponding more complex YAML vs string which then gets parsed back when I started [the thread about selectors](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#discussion_r1455189444).

@thockin : do we have an example in the Kubernetes API where a string is used for a complex expression? I've only found `metav1.ListOptions.FieldFilter` and `LabelFilter`, but those are relatively simple key/value pairs.

What became clear is that we need the capability. How to expose it in the API is then the next step. The right place to discuss this is in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4464 - that is the KEP which defines the selector, not this one here.

> b) Encoding a vendor-specific expression-grammar in YAML is even worse.

This is something for @klueska to comment on....

> c) Transforming one vendor-specific expression grammar into another expression grammar is even worse yet.
> 
> This feels a bit like "we made a wrong turn 3 km back".

Yes. Before even reading your comments I also came to the same conclusion. A session at the Gym with earphones forgotten at home can be very productive :smile: 

Where I took the wrong turn is with the decision to let the scheduler read vendor claim parameter objects and then have it somehow extract relevant information out of that. The motivation was to enable DRA drivers which only consist of a kubelet plugin (similar to a device plugin). That might be laudable goal (weak excuse, I know), but it leads to all this complexity around permissions, dynamically watching unknown resources, and last but least the whole question around how to extract that information (duck typing, templating, expression objects, etc.).

Let's take a step back. Here's my idea:
- The parameter types of each model become objects in the apiserver, each in their own API group (independent versioning!). Alternatively, we could also add `ClaimParameters` as a container for multiple parameter types to `resource.k8s.io`, but separate API groups looks cleaner and simpler to me. I need to think about whether `NodeResourceCapacity` should also live in those new API groups - this has implications for kubelet.
- The vendor needs to write a controller which translates each CR into the in-tree parameter objects. Those objects link back to the vendor CR with UID, group, kind, name, and revision.
- The scheduler watches those in-tree parameter objects. When it encounters a claim which references a vendor CR, it can find the corresponding in-tree parameter objects *and* can check that they are up-to-date by comparing the revision.

This can be combined with strongly-typed in-tree APIs.

@klueska: writing such a CRD controller wouldn't be a problem, would it?

Reviewer: This sounds reasonable for a first step, for sure. It simplifies things a lot. I think it's possible to do as we have been dicussing but not necessary now.

Reviewer: > The parameter types of each model become objects in the apiserver, each in their own API group (independent versioning!). Alternatively, we could also add ClaimParameters as a container for multiple parameter types to resource.k8s.io, but separate API groups looks cleaner and simpler to me. I need to think about whether NodeResourceCapacity should also live in those new API groups - this has implications for kubelet.

I do still think separate kinds for model parameters is overkill. A single kind that contains an array of union structs seems sufficient. I don't think independent versioning of the models is helpful, I think it just creates complexity.

If the concern is for custom schedulers that use custom models, we can always add a custom union type and put that complexity in that use case, rather than it appearing everywhere for everyone.

Author: I agree - I came to the same conclusion after thinking through it a bit more.

Author: I wasn't precise. I agree that we don't need separate kinds.

I disagree with independent versioning. We do need that because at some point we want to to have a resource.k8s.io v1beta1 API which includes a new "foobar" v1alpha1 semantic model. This should be reflected in the Go packages which define the semantic models. Using different Go packages also makes it clearer what belongs together and what doesn't. We can make the final decision during the implementation review.

Reviewer 4: I'm going to ignore the discussion of semantics as types vs builtins - it's a distraction unless we have a clear(ish) model in mind.

> do we have an example in the Kubernetes API where a string is used for a complex expression?

All the places we adopt CEL fit this bill.  See `ValidatingAdmissionPolicySpec`

>> b) Encoding a vendor-specific expression-grammar in YAML is even worse.
>
> This is something for @klueska to comment on....

Not pointing any fingers - we're all figuring this out together, and frankly, we're now willing to reconsider constraints that we may have imposed in the past, so our options are better.

e.g.  Assume that we can agree that "contraints" and "requests" are seperable.  The "selector" as you called it could be a CEL expression (using CEL builtins and k8s extensions) which is run over the published attributes of each resource, producing a boolean result (or even a score!).

Scheduler looks at a pending pod, finds candidate nodes based on hard-criteria like node selector, CPU, memory, existence of requested resource types, then runs that CEL against the potential resources to see which nodes+devices satisfy.

THEN, finally, we can look at the actual resources requested (the vendor CR).  We still need to map fields in the CR to fields in the Cpacaity, but if we're excluding constraints, there should be far fewer of them, so maybe we could map them by fieldpath?

Downside: We can syntax-check CEL but we can't know if it referenced fields are typo'ed or if it is trying to multiply strings.

Upside: We can approximate the evaluation cost of CEL and we can extend it with functions, approximating a DSL.

> The vendor needs to write a controller which translates each CR into the in-tree parameter objects.

Help me understand how the autoscaler uses this?  

A pod is pending which requests an "acme.com/frobnicator" and 5 "FUs" (frobber units!).  The autoscaler can't act on that until the controller updates the user's CR to translate that into a ks8-neutral form, right?

Reviewer 4: I still don't know how to think about parallel modes which require a significant configuration operation which affects all potential consumers.

E.g. Hypothetical device which can do power-of-two sizes.  I can slice a card with 8 units into {1*8U} or {2*4U} or {1*4U, 2*2U} or {1*4U, 1*2U, 2*1U}.  For the very first pod, we have to make a decision, which isn't so bad (we'll be wrong, but OK).  But how do I know what the current mode is when I want to schedule a second pod?

When the kubelet publishes capacity, does it just dump all the parallel options with all the params?  Can I end up with 8 cards, each with 16 virtual functions, each with 4 possible slice-ups, each with 10 attributes (for constraints) and 2 requestable quantities, yielding 5000+ entries in the schema?

Author: > > This is something for @klueska to comment on....
> 
> Not pointing any fingers - we're all figuring this out together, and frankly, we're now willing to reconsider constraints that we may have imposed in the past, so our options are better.

I was just punting on this because he is the expert on real world use cases, not me. He also has the feedback from customers about how they want to select hardware, which might address the "is this a good user interface" aspect.

> > The vendor needs to write a controller which translates each CR into the in-tree parameter objects.
> 
> Help me understand how the autoscaler uses this?
> 
> A pod is pending which requests an "acme.com/frobnicator" and 5 "FUs" (frobber units!). The autoscaler can't act on that until the controller updates the user's CR to translate that into a ks8-neutral form, right?

Correct. But the translation is done by a control plane component of the DRA driver, not by the individual DRA kubelet plugin, so this translation will happen pretty much at the point where the user creates the vendor parameter CR. The translation *only* has that parameter CR as input, not the pod or claim (both not known yet) and not anything from a node (that's what the output gets compared again later).

> But how do I know what the current mode is when I want to schedule a second pod?

The scheduler records the chosen mode in the allocation result (as permanent record) and in it's internal state. Then when it looks at another pod, it knows the mode of an instance.

> When the kubelet publishes capacity, does it just dump all the parallel options with all the params? Can I end up with 8 cards, each with 16 virtual functions, each with 4 possible slice-ups, each with 10 attributes (for constraints) and 2 requestable quantities, yielding 5000+ entries in the schema?

Potentially yes. But if the number of combinations explodes like that, then we clearly need a different way of modeling valid combinations. @klueska came up with a vendor CRD for capacity and claim parameters that get matched against that capacity information. This tells me that it is doable for relevant use cases. How well it then fits other areas I don't know.

I tried to capture my (probably incomplete) understanding in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4464. That might be a better place for a more focused discussion around the specific semantic.

The content in the `{{ ... }}` placeholder is a
[CEL](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/cel/) expression. The
`object` variable provides access to the fields in the vendor CRD. Note that
this particular example driver doesn't use the `Selector` feature. Users never
get to see it either.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

For this proposal to work, kube-scheduler must have permission to read, list

> and watch arbitrary resources. This is necessary because it is not known in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and watch the custom claim parameter resources. It is not known in
```

- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

Dynamic Resource Allocation uses parameters for resources that are completely
opaque to core Kubernetes. They get interpreted by the DRA driver's controller
(for allocating claims) and the DRA drivers' kubelet plugin (for configuring
the resource on a node). During scheduling of a pod, kube-scheduler and the DRA
driver controller(s) that handle claims used by the pod communicate through the
apiserver by updating the PodSchedulingContext object, ultimately leading to
allocation of all pending claims and the pod being scheduled onto a node.

This approach poses a problem for [Cluster
Autoscaler](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler) (CA) because it cannot

> simulate the effect of allocating or deallocating claims. "Semantic parameters"

Reviewer 3: or for any higher level controller that needs to make decisions for a group of pods, like a job scheduler.

this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

### Goals

- Enable cluster autoscaling when pods use resource claims, with correct
  decisions and changing the cluster size by more than one node at a time.

- Support node-local resources. Adding or removing nodes has no effect
  on network-attached resources and therefore CA does not need to (and cannot)
  simulate them.

- Allow DRA driver developers to provide a user experience that is similar to
  the one possible without semantic parameters. Ideally, users should not notice
  at all that a driver is using semantic parameters under the hood.

### Non-Goals

- Support semantic class parameters. They remain opaque and can be used to
  define configuration of resources, but must not affect where a claim can be
  allocated.

- Scheduling performance is expected to become better compared to using the
  PodSchedulingContext. However, this is not the reason for this KEP.

> ## Proposal

Reviewer 3: Where are user stories?

I think we should summarize which kind of use cases are supported, like:
- devices with arbitrary subresources and metadata
- pool of cards

are we supporting node topology?  If not fully, are there simplified cases of topology that can be supported with the proposed models?

Author: The revised intro explains what is possible with the new semantic model.

We have thought about topology a bit and believe that topology constraints can be done based on that semantic model, but how to describe it specifically is still open and not defined yet. There are some comments about that further down.

### Publishing node resources

The kubelet publishes NodeResourceSlices with content provided by the different
drivers running on the node. Access control through the node authorizer ensures
that one kubelet is not allowed to create or modify NodeResourceSlices
belonging to other nodes.

NodeResourceSlices are published separately for each driver, using a version of
the API that matches what that driver is using. This implies that kubelet, DRA
driver, and apiserver must all support that same API version. It might be
possible to support version skew (= keeping kubelet at an older version than
the control plane and the DRA drivers) in the future, but currently this is out
of scope.

Embedded inside the NodeResourceSlices is the list of resources managed by the
driver. Typically there is a single object per driver, but this could also get
spread out across multiple if a single object would be too large.

Here is an example where the driver provides one discrete card which has
a certain amount of compute units and RAM that can be reserved:

```
kind: NodeResourceSlice
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha2
...
nodeName: worker-1
driverName: cards.dra.example.com
resources:

> - name: CardA

Reviewer 3: Let's say that a node has 2 cards like this. Would the NRSlice contain two elements with roughly the same contents?

Reviewer: Details on this normalization are still being worked out, but our current thinking is that we have at least some data normalized so we don't explode the size of the data.

Metadata about a card can be captured once and then published once to the NodeResourceSlice, perhaps, and then individual instances refer back to it. So you might end up with a very rich "here is what my card looks like" and then a list of 8 cards that are just a name/UID and a reference back to that list. We are also talking about capturing the *status* of actual allocations somewhere - this would have to refer to the name/UID.

  attributes:
  - name: meta
    metadata:
      versions:
      - name: API
        version: "v3.2.1" # Must comply with semver v2.0.0.
      labels:
      - name: SupportsPowerSaving
      - name: Color
        value: "Red" # arbitrary string
      values:
      - name: LengthInCentimeters
        quantity: 100 # int64
  - name: RAM
    counter:

>       count: 1000000 # int64, could also be a resource.Quantity for readability

Author: @johnbelamaric: in your proposal you had a `block` value. I left that out because there are two other ways of achieving "allocation in blocks":

- The "count" (here) and "required" (in the parameters) values can divided by the block size. So if there are 128 items which can be allocated in chunks of 32, "count" becomes 4.

- The count remains at it is, and the translation from vendor CRD to ResourceClaimParameters rounds up the "required" value. This works less well when users are allowed to create their own ResourceClaimParameters because they might get it wrong. The advantage is that if the block size somehow depends on some other parameters, then the driver can round accordingly.

Regarding `resource.Quantity`: I prefer int64 because a quantity could also be fractional, which doesn't make sense here. I just wanted to mention the option.

Reviewer: I think we want to allow users to specify things in natural units, rather than having to know the block size. They should say, "my workload needs 2.5Gi of memory" and don't need to know that because of the particular card/driver that was selected, this means they will be allocated 3Gi. If we just change the "count" then the coupling is tighter and the user has to know more.

That's the reason for the block. But it doesn't need to be a separate thing than "counter". The counter model just needs to be able to specify a block size for consumption, and default it to "1".

I didn't do it that way though, for the reason you state - I wanted 'counter' to be int64 and block to be resource.Quantity.

Author: > I think we want to allow users to specify things in natural units, rather than having to know the block size. 

That's what they can do in the vendor CRD. I expect that in almost all cases that will be a better user-facing API that directly letting users create a ResourceClaimParameter.

  - name: ComputeUnits
    counter:
      count: 100
```

> The `metadata` and `counter` fields are mutually exclusive. Their content is

Reviewer 3: can I have more than one attribute that declares `metadata`? Why is it necessary?

The `metadata` field will be used by CEL expressions. Because it contains one
list per type of value, the CEL expression doesn't need to convert from string
to those types during evaluation, which makes it fully type-safe. Validation
already happens when publishing the `NodeResourceSlice`.

`metadata` is an example of an attribute which is qualitative, not
quantitative, and one which contains more than one value. Once we are sure that
this is how we want to handle meta data and that there is no confusion with
other qualitative attributes, then the struct can also be lifted up into a
`metadata` field in the `resources` entries.

In the following example, a different driver instead describes a pool of
identical cards:

```
kind: NodeResourceSlice
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha2
...
nodeName: worker-1
driverName: pool.dra.example.com
resources:
- name: PoolOfLargeCards
  attributes:
  - name: meta
    metadata:
      labels:
      - name: Configuration
        value: Large
  - name: Number
    counter:
      count: 8
```

If a driver needs to reduce resource capacity, then there is a risk that a claim gets
allocated using that capacity while the kubelet is updating the

> NodeResourceSlices. The implementations of semantic models must handle

Reviewer 3: The scheduler could also send multiple pods to a Node before observing the update of NodeResourceSlices.
Do you have any plans to avoid that?

Reviewer: Patrick will be updating this to reflect this (if it's not already below), but in DRA there is already the concept of an AllocationResult. This will be captured along with the scheduler decisions. Consider it "allocation intent". The scheduler can construct the "current capacity" by looking at the "base capacity" and accumulating all the allocations. Those are persisted to survive scheduler restarts.

Coming soon in this KEP is the addition of a periodic reporting of "allocation status" from the source of truth (typically on-node driver). If our "allocation intent" and the "allocation status" do not match we can flag that there is an issue (subject to lag of course).

define a CRD like this:

```
kind: CardParameters
apiVersion: dra.example.com/v1alpha1
metadata:
  name: my-parameters
  namespace: user-namespace
  uid: foobar-uid
...
spec:
  minimumAPI: "v1.0.0"
  supportsPowerSaving: true
  requirements:
    RAM: 10Gi
    ComputeUnits: 2
```

Note that all fields can be fully validated, including value ranges that are
specific to the underlying hardware.

When a user creates an object of that type, the DRA driver control plane must
convert it into an in-tree ResourceClaimParameters object because the scheduler
doesn't understand `CardParameters`. That object then looks like this:

```
kind: ResourceClaimParameters
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha2

metadata:
  # This cannot be the same as my-parameters because parameter objects with a different
  # type might also use it. Instead, the original object gets linked to below.
  name: someArbitraryName
  namespace: user-namespace

generatedFrom:
  name: my-parameters
  kind: CardParameters
  apiGroup: dra.example.com
  uid: foobar-uid
  generation: 10 # Ensures that only up-to-date generated parameters are used.

parameters:
- name: meta
  metadata:

>     # A CELL expression with access to the labels, versions, and values defined for

Reviewer 3: CEL :)

    # the node resource.
    selector: versions["API"] >= "v1.0.0" && labels.has("SupportsPowerSaving")
- name: RAM
  counter:
    required: 10000000
- name: ComputeUnits
  counter:
    required: 2
```

The semantic is that all parameters must be satisfied by a single resource of
the driver. Note that for the "pool of cards" example that makes it impossible
to ask for two cards with no additional selection criteria and then get one
from `PoolOfLargeCards` and one from a hypothetical second pool

> `PoolOfSmallCards` (not included in the example above).

Author: Simplifying the semantic like this is relevant for evaluating requirements during scheduling. Suppose we have two counters and a selector. With the current semantic, we can check each parameter against a resource and move to the next as soon as one resource does not match. 

If we allow "partial matches" (take x items from resource A and y items from resource B) then we need to define whether it's valid to take some items for counter M from resource A and some items for counter N from resource B. There may have to be some back-and-forth to satisfy all constraints. I'd like to this because the use cases are not that strong.

With the current semantic, "shared discrete cards" works and "single pool of cards" work. The latter is what people currently do with device plugin and (for selection) node labels.

We don't get "multiple pools with allocation from more than one pool". If we limit the evaluation to "one counter" + "metadata", then we could add a special case for it, but I'd prefer to punt on it for now.

Author: All of this goes away if we move the logic of how to define "pools" back down into the semantic model. @klueska is working on a proposal for such a model right now.

The semantic models define how to match the parameters against the node
resources. For the `counter` model, the required amount must be available. Once
allocated, the remaining amount can be used for other claims. The `metadata`
model only returns a yes/no decision.

Instead of defining a vendor CRD, DRA driver authors or administrators may also
decide to allow users to create and reference ResourceClaimParameters directly.

### Communicating allocation to the DRA driver

The scheduler decides which resources to use for a claim and how much of

> them. It also needs to take a snapshot of the full class and claim parameter

Reviewer 3: We should avoid having the scheduler watch arbitrary CRs.
A better approach would be for the third-party controller to write the parameters into the claim spec, and make it immutable after the first write (or even just immutable when the claim is bound).

Reviewer: I'm not sure we can write it to the claim spec, but I think we can store it in the ClaimParameters object. See https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#discussion_r1480356891

Author: RawExtension for vendor configuration parameter in ResourceClaimParameters was added. Same for resource class parameters.

publishes them with the node as the owner, so they get deleted when a node goes
down and then gets removed.

```
// NodeResourceSlice provides information about available
// resources on individual nodes.
type NodeResourceSlice struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta
	// Standard object metadata
	// +optional
	metav1.ObjectMeta

	// NodeName identifies the node where the capacity is available.
	// A field selector can be used to list only NodeResources
	// objects with a certain node name.
	NodeName string

	// DriverName identifies the DRA driver providing the capacity information.
	// A field selector can be used to list only NodeResources
	// objects with a certain driver name.
	DriverName string

	// Resources describes resources managed by the driver on
	// the node. It is possible to create more than one NodeResources
	// object for the same node and driver if this array becomes to large
	// for a single object.
	Resources []NodeResource
}

// NodeResource describes one resource.
type NodeResource struct {
	// ID is chosen by the driver to distinguish between different resource
	// instances. It only needs to be unique for the driver and node.  In

> 	// other words, the tuple of NodeName, DriverName, InstanceID needs to

Author: ```suggestion
	// other words, the tuple of NodeName, DriverName, resource ID needs to
```

	// be unique in the cluster.
	ID string

>     // Attributes describe the instance.

Author: ```suggestion
    // Attributes describe the resource.
```

type ResourceAttribute struct {
    Name string
    ResourceAttributeModel // inline
}

// ResourceAttributeModel must have one and only one field set.
type ResourceAttributeModel struct {
	Counter *CounterAttribute
    Metadata *MetadataAttribute
}
```

### ResourceClaimParameters

```
type ResourceClaimParameters struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
	// Standard object metadata
	metav1.ObjectMeta

	// If this object was created from some other resource, then this links
	// back to that resource. This field is used to find the in-tree representation
	// of the claim parameters when the parameter reference of the claim refers
	// to some unknown type.
	GeneratedFrom *ResourceClaimParametersObjectReference

    // Shareable indicates whether the allocated claim is meant to be shareable
    // by multiple consumers at the same time.
    Shareable bool

	// Parameters contains parameters for semantic models. All of
	// the parameters specified here must be satisfied before a claim
	// using these parameters can be allocated.
    //
    // At the moment, all of them must be satisfied by the same resource instance.
	Parameters []ResourceParameter

> }

Author: Besides the mixing of different "parameters" there's another conceptual aspect that we should consider: in the original design we added the ability to allocate resources from different drivers for a single claim. Each `ResultHandle` then got passed to the right kubelet plugin for the resource that it represents.

I have not replicated that idea in this KEP. I think we should allow it. It's not hard, we just need to add the driver name(s) into the ResourceClaimParameters instead of assuming that it's the same as in the resource class. The resoure class name can still be the default.

Let's decide about one vs. many models per kubelet driver first, then I can update accordingly here.

Author: `Requests []ResourceRequest` is now per-driver, so this has been resolved.

  many resources are needed and which capabilities they must have. Typically, it
  is defined using a vendor-specific type which might also support configuration
  parameters (i.e. parameters that are *not* needed for allocation but *are*
  needed for configuration).

* With such a claim in place, DRA drivers "resolve" the contents of any
  vendor-specific claim parameters into a canonical form (i.e. a generic
  `ResourceClaimParameters` object in the `resource.k8s.io` API group) which
  the scheduler (or Cluster Autoscaler) can evaluate against the
  `NodeResourceSlice` of any candidate nodes without knowing exactly what is
  being requested. They then use this information to help decide which node to
  schedule a pod on (as well as allocate resources from its `NodeResourceSlice`
  in the process).

* Once a node is chosen and a workload is sent to it, DRA drivers are
  responsible for injecting any allocated resources into the Pod, according to
  the resource choices made by the scheduler. This includes applying any
  configuration information attached to the vendor-specific claim parameters
  object used in the request.

In this KEP, we define a single "semantic model" called

> `PartitionableResources`, and use it throughout the discussion to help describe

Author: I have one problem with "partitionable": I can't spell it reliably. Half the time I write "partionable" instead. It's also not a typo that is easy to spot.

If someone has a suggestion for a name that doesn't have this problem, then I am all ears. We don't need to finalize that before KEP freeze, but definitely before the 1.30 code freeze because the name then becomes part of the API.
